[CIS 10.1 (2014) 87–109]
doi: 10.1558/cis.29642

Comparative Islamic Studies (print) ISSN 1740-7125
Comparative Islamic Studies (online) ISSN 1743-1638

Communal Democracy:
The Social Contract and Confederalism in Rojava
Michael Knapp1 and Joost Jongerden2
1. Wageningen University
2. Wageningen University and Kyoto University
michael.knapp@wur.nl; joost.jongerden@wur.nl

The article engages with the question of identity and self-government and its implications for the concept of citizenship in Rojava.
A short overview of the historical development of the political idea
of democratic autonomy as applied in Rojava is given, a model that
claims to be on the way to creating a stateless model of radical
democracy whose realization involves forms of emancipation of the
citizen, from a subject of a state to an active participant. The social
contract and the structure of self-government in Rojava is examined from this perspective and the conclusion drawn that citizenship, which has been seized by the statist model, is currently being
reclaimed by the people in Rojava through democratic autonomy.
This is being effected through participative action and self-education as acts of citizenship and aims to separate the idea of government from the idea of the state.

Introduction
In its 1978 manifesto, the PKK declared the establishment of an independent
state the only correct political goal. Following a critique of the character of
national liberation struggles and real existing socialism, the party started to
Keywords: Rojava, Kurdistan, self-administration, democratic-confederalism,
citizenship, assemblies, democracy
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016, Office 415, The Workstation, 15 Paternoster Row, Sheffield, S1 2BX
Communal Democracy

question whether independence should be conceptualized and practised as
state/nation-state construction. This eventuated in a redeinition of the party’s
political strategy according to which the PKK disconnected the idea of selfdetermination from that of state establishment. Arguing that the ideas of the
state and government are not the same, the PKK developed a political strategy
based on the self-governing capacities of people. The key-concepts in the PKK
discourse on self-government that developed were “democratic confederalism”
and “democratic autonomy.” From the mid-2000s onwards, the Kurdish liberation movement started organising assemblies for self-government throughout
Kurdistan.
This article will engage with the development of self-government in Rojava,
a region in the north of Syria that became known internationally after ierce
battles against forces of the so called islamic state attacking the border town
of Kobanê. While the pictures of armed women as antithesis to the patriarchal,
however, misogynous posture of IS were broadcast around the world, the political dimensions of the struggle in Rojava remained somewhat obscure. A foundational document, the Social Contract, declared the ideas of democratic autonomy
and democratic confederalism a corner-stone of the region’s political architecture. Though the region is mainly inhabited by Kurds, other populations are
living in the area and involved in the development of this new political architecture, including Arabs, Assyrians, Chaldeans, Arameans, Turkmen, Armenians and Chechens. In this article, we argue that this social contract disconnects
the idea of the state from that of government, and frees citizenship from state
capture to redeine it in terms of relations among and the self-administrative
capacities of people (citizens).
The development of this new political architecture is of particular importance against the background of what was referred to as a crisis among Kurdish
political parties on the eve of the uprising in Syria. Some of the reasons why the
popularity of political parties in general had fallen at that time were factionalism, weaknesses in ideology and practise, the domination of personality issues
and an inability to achieve concessions from the state (Allsop 2014, 176–177). At
the same time the levels of Kurdish national consciousness and youth activism
were high. It was from out of this contradiction between a crisis in traditional
party politics and high political consciousness that the Democratic Union Party
(Partiya Yekîtiya Demokrat, PYD) developed its political alternative of bottom-up
self-administration. When traditional political parties established the Kurdish
National Council KNC in 2011 under the political guidance of the president of
the Kurdistan Regional Government (in Northern Iraq), Massoud Barzani, this
was not only to unite these parties against the Syrian regime but also a response
against the PYD and the rapidly spreading popularity of its conception of a postparty politics. In this article, we will not discuss the strained relations between
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016

Michael Knapp and Joost Jongerden
the PYD and KNC, whose leadership resides in Erbil and associated political parties have a limited presence in Rojava (Gunes and Lowe 2015, 5), but focus on
the emerging practice of self-administration.
The structure of this article is as follows. First we present an overview of the
historical development of the concept of democratic autonomy, focussing on
the ideas of Abdullah Öcalan, and then we look at its application in Rojava following the revolution there, concentrating on the institutions and practice of
democratic autonomy and self-administration. A main conclusion we draw is
that the decentralization of power, economy and administration in Rojava—in
short, a transformation of the idea of democracy—leads to a new kind of social
contract, one that is not based on a necessary connection to the national state,
but on connections between people within and among local communities, representing a social contract which reclaims citizenship from the state.
Data for this article has been collected by means of study of primary sources,
observation and interviews. Interviews were conducted with the PKK in Qandil
and the authors made various visits to Rojava. Michael Knapp visits Rojava regularly, where he is doing his PhD research on the concept of citizenship in democratic autonomy. He stayed there one month in May, 2014 and, most recently
at the time of writing, two weeks in October 2015, undertaking interviews
with a wide variety of interlocutors. Joost Jongerden stayed there also for one
week in October 2015 (separately) making observations and doing interviews.

Backgrounds
“The great social measure of the commune,” wrote Karl Marx in The Civil War in
France, “was its own working existence” (Marx 2009 [1871], 46). Yet, the commune was more than a “working laboratory of political inventions” and also
more and something other than an ‘uprising’ (Ross 2015, 18, 27). Importantly, the
commune broke with the modernist view that civilized societies are organized
in the form of states, thus distinguishing state-craft from government. “Under
the Commune, Paris wanted to be not the capital of France but an autonomous
collective in a universal federation of peoples,” states Ross (2015, 18, 27); “It did
not wish to be a state but rather an element, a unit in a federation of communes
that was ultimately international in scale.” This was referred to as “voluntary
association of all local initiatives,” as “a free union of autonomous collectives,”
and as a “confederation of free peoples” (Ross 2015, 38). Today, the voluntary
association of people in a confederal union of communes lies at the basis of government in the three “cantons” of Rojava (Cezîre, Kobanê and Afrin).1
1.

When the canton system was announced, it was thought to be the best option to
overcome the concept of a centralized state, which had subjects, not citizens. In
the social contract, three cantons are mentioned: Cêzire, Kobanê and Afrin, but
the option of other regions joining the confederation is explicitly left open. In the

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016
Communal Democracy

It was the imprisoned PKK leader, Abdullah Öcalan, who initiated a debate
among Kurds about a confederal union of communes as alternative to the
nation-state. In his work developed in the 2000s, but going back to the 1980s,
Öcalan questioned the relationship between self-determination and nationstate formation. He started to consider the nation-state not only as a particular
historical construction, but also as a problematic one. His critique was directed
both at the centralized character of the state, which came to equate both
government and society, and its actual functioning as assimilation machine,
inscribing a (pre)conceived culture onto the population—and he came to the
conclusion that the nation-state does not liberate the subject from colonial status, but subjugates it (Öcalan 2010a, 193). Inspired by the work of the libertarian
ecologist Murray Bookchin (Öcalan 2008; Biehl 2012, 10), Abdullah Öcalan introduced the concepts of democratic autonomy and democratic confederalism, the
irst referring to a status of people (that of determining their own future), the
second to a bottom-up council system of self-administration (through which
self-determination is to be practiced) (Akkaya and Jongerden 2013; Jongerden
and Akkaya 2013).
Öcalan connects practice and ideology to an underground current of what
Bookchin (1991) calls the “Athens model.” Following Kropotkin (1947 [1897]),
Bookchin differentiates between two ideas or models of politics, the Hellenic
and the Roman, as having given rise to two different imaginaries of politics
and understandings of government. The irst, the Hellenic model, stands for a
participatory-communal form of politics, with which Bookchin aligns himself,
while the second, the Roman model, stands for a centralist and statist form,
which he rejects (White 2008, 159). The statist, centralized Roman model has
a “herd of subjects” (Kropotkin 1947 [1897], 10), while the Hellenic model has
an “active citizenship” (Bookchin 1991, 11). Unfortunately, Bookchin argues,
it is the Roman model that has become the dominant form in modern society,
informing the American and French constitutionalists of the eighteenth century. The Athens model exists as a counter- and underground current, however,
inding expression in the Paris Commune of 1871, in the initial councils (soviets) that emerged in the spring-time of the revolution in Russia in 1917 and in
the Spanish Revolution between 1936 and 1939.
Though coming from a Marxist tradition, Öcalan criticizes historical-materialism and its construction of a teleological determinism, in which societies
canton system, the idea is that decision making is allocated as much as possible to
the local level, in line with the idea of democratic confederalism. The cantons border Turkey in the north and are separated by territory controlled by Islamic State
and other Jihadi groups. Kobanê and Cizîre were connected in June, 2015, with the
liberation of the city of Tel Abyad (Girê Sipî), which is now part of the Canton of
Kobanê.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016

Michael Knapp and Joost Jongerden
pass through evolutionary “stages” of political organization to the present of
nation-states. In his work developed from his court “defence” on trial in Athens
and subsequent “prison writings” through the 2000s, Öcalan rejects the idea of
a linear societal development and its basis of material conditions (the development of production forces), arguing that history is driven by social struggles.
The development of capitalism and class relations are not a necessary steppingstone to socialism, and can be by-passed:
The emergence of hierarchy and class rule has not been inevitability but the product of force. Hierarchy and, based on it, the formation of statehood were implemented by the use of massive force and
deceit. The important forces of natural society untiringly resisted and
were steadily forced pushed back and their room to move maximally
reduced. Some areas they [hierarchy and class rule] were never able to
access. [Nevertheless,] the policy and propaganda of the ruling system
has succeeded to the extent that one sees the whole society exclusively
formed out of class- and state hierarchy. (Öcalan 2010a, 20)2
Instead of taking capitalist society and relatedly the proletariat as the leading
agent of change, Öcalan started to orient himself towards what he referred to
as “natural” or “organic” society, a society untouched by commodiication and
assimilative bureaucracies, which he thought to have existed in the Neolithic
period some 10,000 years ago: “During the Neolithic period a complete communal social order, so called ‘primitive socialism,’ was created around woman,”
a social order that ‘saw none of the enforcement practices of the state order’
(Öcalan 2010, 9). Institutional hierarchies, Öcalan argues, did not exist at that
time, in that stage of development. This idea of a natural or organic society
bears clear resemblances to the concept of ‘primitive Communism’ developed
by Morgan (1881), as well as by Engels (1894, 155), Childe (1948, 12) and others.
From the Marxist viewpoint of historical materialism, however, the phase of
primitive communism had necessarily to be overcome by statist society on the
journey through feudalism and capitalism to socialism and communism.
Although Öcalan and the PKK had been strongly inluenced by Marxism-Leninism, they thus replaced the dialectic-materialist principal informing the necessary passage through the stages of economically based socio-political development with the concept of building up radical democracy in the here and now
– and, moreover, viewing the social fabric in the Middle East, which has not
been totally absorbed by capitalism, as an advantage. The less “advanced” polity of the area in which Kurds live – arrogantly negated in the discourse of the
Turkish state that Öcalan grew up with, of course – now becomes a relatively
fertile ground for development along a different, non-modernist line. Öcalan is
2.

Authors’ translation (and below, for all Öcalan 2010a and 2010b quotations).

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016
Communal Democracy

implying in his argument, therefore, a destruction that commodiication and
assimilation does to the people in the statist societies of capitalist modernity,
isolating them from one another and deining them as amorphous masses to
be ruled under the tutelage of elites around concepts of national statehood.
Therefore, the linking of people together in councils and creation of a kind of
active and activist citizenship is one of the bases on which the alternative to
nation-state and capitalist modernity can—and should—be built.
In the proposed system of democratic autonomy and democratic confederalism, the former refers to a re-grounding of the political status of people, on the
basis of self-government rather than on peoples’ relations with the state.3 Democratic confederalism aims at the strengthening of local administrative capacities organized in the form of councils at the very local level, of streets and then
neighbourhood, through district/village and town/city to region. Thus, democratic confederalism may be regarded as the form of self-administration in
which autonomy is organized. Öcalan considers this a necessary and decisively
break from centralized and representative systems, which turn politics from
collective decision-making to individual choice and are based not on social relations among people but on individual relations of people with the state, turning
politics into a private activity:
As opposed to the binding the people to the state with election rituals,
democratic practice operates to empower the people to their own existence, freedom and self-administration. To pursue position within state
power and have the people accept the continuation of power based
relationships equate to the striking of a heavy blow at democracy. I
characterize the development of democracy in this particular way in
the 19th and 20th centuries as treason to Democracy. The democratic
struggle in Kurdistan only makes sense if it is fought according the
primary deinition of democracy. The game of electing some to rule is
nothing other than that slaves’ coming together from time to time to
conirm the rule of the same masters. (Öcalan 2010b, 498)
Instead, of deining democracy through the state, Öcalan searches for a formulation of democracy without it:
The organization of the democratic society in form of a network of
organs of civil self-administration means a movement from democratic
city councils to quarter and village communes, from cooperatives to
NGOs with a wide social base, from human rights and children’s rights
and animal rights organizations to vanguard organizations of women´s
liberation, ecology and youth. (Öcalan 2010b, 205)
3.

Duran Kalkan, personal communication, 28–10–2014. Kalkan is a member of the
executive council of the PKK.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016

Michael Knapp and Joost Jongerden
The project of democratic confederalism can be considered a sedimentation
of this networked character of self-administration. In practice, this has meant
that with the beginning of the revolution in Rojava, peoples’ councils were
introduced at the level of city quarters, cities and cantons.

The revolution in Rojava
The PYD was established in 2003, following a reorganization and organizational
differentiation within the PKK. This reorganization and differentiation followed debates on the centralized character of the party and was one of the irst
products of the paradigm shift from state building to self-government. The PYD
was one of the new organizations in the new complex of political organizations
following the dissolution of the PKK as centralized party. The PKK transformed
into a party-complex, a formation of parties and organizations comprising several parties (including the PKK as a party), a co-party that separately organizes
women, and sister parties in Iraq, Iran as well as in Syria, the PYD, and selfdefence forces. Alongside this cluster of parties, the PKK established institutions through which the integration and coordination of political practices is
facilitated. The most important of these today is the Association of Communities in Kurdistan (Koma Civakên Kurdistan, KCK), which is basically a network
of village, city, and regional councils, whose assembly is called the Kurdistan
People’s Congress KONGRA-GEL. TEV-DEM is part of this KCK. In short, the
PKK today is a movement that has institutionalized itself in diverse areas and
expresses itself in a radical democratic discourse.
After the Turkish government broke its relations with the Syrian government
in 2011, allegations were made of collaboration between the Ba’ath party and
the PYD (Allsopp 2014, 41), mainly by competing forces in Syria, e.g. nationalist
Arab opposition and Kurdish forces collaborating with Turkey. Moreover, Kurdish parties have also been negotiating with the Syrian government for more
political rights over the last 50 years (Allsopp 2014, 197). Yet the political outlook of the PYD, defending a strengthening of society vis-a-vis the state through
a form of active citizenship and self-government stood square to the objective
of Assad to restore centralized state rule in Syria, the idea of self-rule was also
received negatively by the conservative Arab opposition. On several occasions
YPG/YPJ (and later SDF) forces clashed with pro-Assad forces, among others
in Aleppo, Qamislo and Hasakeh. Moreover, since 1999 relations between the
Syrian government and the PKK had deteriorated following the extradition of
PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan in 1998, and from its inception in 2003, the Syrian
regime considered the PYD as distrustful (Tejel 2009, 117; 122). The PYD (and
Yekiti), unlike other Kurdish political parties, succeeded in politicizing Kurdish
identity because of the repression (Tejel 2009, 123).

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016
Communal Democracy

The councils in Rojava did not just appear in the summer of 2012, when YPG
forces took Kobanê on July 19, followed by Amude and Afrin on July 20, and
Derik and Qamislo in the days after. In less than two weeks, regime forces pulled
back to the periphery of Rojava, though keeping strongholds in Hasakeh and
Qamislo. The councils had been a work in process since at least 2004. This was
partly in response to the so-called Massacre of Qamislo (Al-Qamishli) in 2004,
when after a football match between teams from Qamislo and Deir-el-Zor, whose
tribal population is known to have strong sympathies for the regime of Saddam
Hussein, Arabs attacked Kurds, leading to the deaths of more than 70 people
and injuring hundreds.4 This incident came at the same time that, inspired by
Abdullah Ocalan, the new paradigm started to land within the organization. In
2005, the Association of Associations in Kurdistan KKK (Kôma Komalên Kurdistan) was established, later renamed into KCK, or Association of Communities in
Kurdistan (Koma Civakên Kurdistan), which aimed at the development of a selfgovernment system based on the establishment of a council-democracy. This is
understood as a move of and toward activist citizenship or the “transformation
of subjects into actors on a huge scale” (Isin 2008, 18).5
The so-called “Arab Spring” had a big effect in Syria. Due to the strength of the
Syrian regime, its backing from Iran and Russia and its brutal reaction to the irst
uprisings, followed by the militarization of opposition forces by regional powers like Turkey, Qatar and Saudi Arabia along with the EU, UK and the USA as
international powers, the protest and the struggle for democratic change became
4.

Then in north-east Syria, Qamishlo is on the Turkish border; the attack, initially
by supporters of Saddam Hussein at a football match, continued as the violence
spread and regime security forces took control of the city.

5.

Importantly, this occurred in a context that Kurdish political parties were in the midst
of a crisis when the Syrian uprising took place in 2011 while Kurdish political consciousness was higher than ever (Allsopp 2014, 176). Harriet Allsopp relates the crisis,
among others, to factionalism, elitism, ideological weakness and political inabilities,
while consciousness was high as a result of increasing internet access and Kurdish satellite TV, providing accessibility to information on the struggle of the Kurdish national
movement elsewhere. The PYD, who acted as a catalyst of the TEV-DEM movement,
very well sensed this situation, investing in grass-roots political development. When
the uprising in Syria took place, in most Kurdish cities youngsters took the street,
reclaiming the streets (Allsopp 2014, 196). Kurds, however, were suspicious about the
Arab opposition, which, in the irst year was dominated by the Turkey-supported Muslim brotherhood and that adhered to a Arab nationalist agenda and rejected political
decentralization and Kurdish political rights. Not alleged ties with Assad, but the antiKurdish attitude was a reason for the resistance of the PYD against the Free Syrian
Army. Salih Muslim, in 2011, declared that they did not only want a regime change, but
a system change: “We demand a fundamental change to the oppressive system. There
are some who hold up the slogan: the fall of the regime. In contract we demand the fall
of the oppressive authoritarian system” (cited in Allsopp 2014, 209).

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016

Michael Knapp and Joost Jongerden
transformed into a protracted civil and sectarian war. In Rojava, meanwhile, the
movement for a Democratic Society (Tevgera Demokratîk, TEV-DEM) had been
founded by cadres previously active in the PKK and later in its sister-party, the
PYD. While TEV-DEM was developing an assembly structure in secret in Rojava,
the war was approaching too when the Syrian oposition took the cities of Cerablus (Jarablus) and Minbij (Manbij) to the west of the Euphrates. In response to
this development, PYD/TEV-DEM decided to drive the Syrian state out of Kobanê,
which ignited the Revolution of Rojava in the two other cantonal regions, Cizîrê
and Afrin. The People’s Defence Forces (Yekîneyên Parastina Gel, YPG), previously
an underground organization bound to the councils, became the oficial defence
force (now bound also to the parliamentarian structure). It is important here to
note the kind of defence force the YPG is, as a new development in the Kurdish
area, itself also a part of the system of democratic autonomy.6
Normally, military units in the Kurdish area have a history and operate as
party militias, such as the (Iraqi Kurdish) Peshmerga attached to the Kurdish
Democratic Party (KDP, or Partiya Demokrat a Kurdistanê, PDK) or the Patriotic
Union of Kurdistan (PUK) or some also to the Gorran Party. Therefore, the YPG
is often misinterpreted as the party militia of the PYD—which is not the case,
since it is under the democratic control of councils and their parliament, and
its members and commanders come from various parties and ethno-cultural
backgrounds—as conirmed by our observations during several visits to Rojava.
Furthermore, the YPG is sworn to the principles of democratic autonomy of
gender equality, radical democracy and social ecology. In that sense, one could
interpret the self-defence units as places of education, which is valued highly in
all the democratic autonomy institutions of Rojava.
When people together with the YPG surrounded military bases at the start of
the open rebellion and revolution in northern Syria, the state retreated from
the region mostly without bloodshed, though keeping control over certain
neighbourhoods in Qamislo and Hasaka. When the regime in Rojava imploded,
people had to organize themselves. In this context, we can identify two factors
at work in the application of the model of democratic autonomy in the region.
On the one hand, there is the need to organize daily life without an existing
administration—and we know from many examples of such forms of organization in times of crisis that humans tend to spontaneously initiate collective
solution process to secure basic alimentation, energy and security needs. On
the other hand, there is the long history of the PKK in the region and the development of its paradigm of radical democracy and council systems, since at least
1999. People did not give up in resignation, but immediately took power in the
form of councils at every stage. Parties exist, too, but have lost much of their
6.

Remo, Hesen, http://tr.hawarnews.com/rojava-devriminin-3-yili/.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016
Communal Democracy

importance as mechanisms of representation. The PYD in particular became
more an institution to support the development of radical democracy then the
classical model of political party.

Social contract and council democracy
On the 29th January, 2014, the social contract of Rojava, developed by people
from all socio-ethno-religious identities in Rojava, was ratiied by the councils
and the parliament in Amude. This document has the character of a draft to be
discussed and revised but securing the institutions of council democracy and
the values of secularism, gender-liberation and multi-identity. The preamble of
the contract runs thus:
We, the people of the Democratic Autonomous Regions of Afrin, Cezîre
and Kobanê, a confederation of Kurds, Arabs, Assyrians, Chaldeans,
Arameans, Turkmen, Armenians and Chechens, freely and solemnly
declare and establish this Charter, which has been drafted according to
the principles of Democratic Autonomy.
In pursuit of freedom, justice, dignity and democracy and led by
principles of equality and environmental sustainability, the Charter
proclaims a new social contract, based upon mutual and peaceful coexistence and understanding between all strands of society. It protects
fundamental human rights and liberties and reafirms the peoples’
right to self-determination.
Under the Charter, we, the people of the Autonomous Regions, unite in
the spirit of reconciliation, pluralism and democratic participation so
that all may express themselves freely in public life.7
Social contracts since Rousseau (2002 [1762]) have always been concerned with
how the relationship between state and people as sovereign is organized, where
the people is the sum of the individuals living in the territory to which the contract applies (over which it has jurisdiction). This dissolves the will of the individual into the state, and the ensuing representative democratic discussion places
the individual at the centre in the context of the rise of protestant ethics and capitalism (Weber 2005: 84). The social contract of Rojava goes beyond state and individualism and thus redeines democracy in two interrelated ways. First, the model
of the national state is clearly rejected: “The regional administrations of democratic autonomy do not accept the understanding of national, religious or militarist statehood and, at the same time, reject central administration and centralized
power.”8 Stepping back from a centralized understandings of power involves all
7.

http://peaceinkurdistancampaign.com/charter-of-the-social-contract/.

8.

http://kantonrojava.com/peymanameya-hevpeymana-civaki/ Translation by authors.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016

Michael Knapp and Joost Jongerden
regions and localities inding, as far as possible, their own way of tackling the
issues of administration and government as appropriate to the social composition
and general situation of the community. This leads us to the second point, that
people are related to one another by the idea of community organization.
This model emphasizes the concept of organising the cohabitant singularities of the multitude in line with the models of self-representation and selforganization, as explained below, wherein the institutions of self-organization
are not conined to cultural and ethnic categories of identity, which are composed by monistic national states, but open also to the constitution of new entities of identity. Thus, the duality of individuum-state is overcome, horizontally
as opposed to hierarchically linking individuals through collectives to form a
political will developed from multiplicities (or a multitude born of pluralities)
rather than singularities. Therefore, the social contract does not produce a
state, or a sovereign power, vis-a-vis individual people, but is based on the idea
that politics emerges from relations among (territorially deined) groups of
people. This represents a radical break from mainstream social contract thinking, based as it is on a methodological individualism and statism.
Bookchin (1990, 11) argued that confederalism reaches its fullest development in relation to a project of autonomy, “when placing local farms, factories, and other enterprises in local municipal hands” or “when a community (…)
begins to manage its own economic resources in an interlinked way with other
communities.” In this model, the economy is placed in the custody of the confederal councils, and thus “neither collectivized nor privatized, it is common”
(1990, 10). In Rojava, buildings, land and infrastructure that were formerly the
property of the Syrian state were given to the control of the city councils in
2012. The councils implemented what is referred to as ownership by use, which
grants individuals usage rights to the buildings, land and infrastructure, but
not the right to sell and buy on the market or convert them private enterprises.
This usage ownership or stewardship is intended to prevent speculation and
the concentration of the wealth in the hands of a few (Strangers in a Tangled
Wilderness 2015, 26). In the cantons of Afrin and Cizîre, many cooperatives have
already been developed. Most of them, according to the decentralist concept of
democratic autonomy, are small cooperatives, but there are also some agricultural cooperatives in which more than 2,000 households participate, near the
city of Amude. The big cooperatives operate among villages satisfying the need
for agricultural subsistence and even producing a surplus for exchange with
other cooperatives, like reineries, and for sale at the markets.9
Parallel to this declaration of democratic autonomy with the social contract,
the organization of people’s councils and especially communes grew more
9.

Interview, Economic Commission, Canton of Cizîre, 2 November, 2015.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016
Communal Democracy

intense.10 While before, the development of self-administration in Rojava had
involved the establishment of peoples’ councils at the level of city and quarter, now streets and neighbourhoods started formalising their organization as
institutions of democratic autonomy. According to TEV-DEM member Abdulselam Ahmed, there had been a gap between quarter councils and the population
before, so the system of the “commune” as smallest unit for the organization of
society was initiated from the beginning of 2014.11 Thus, the commune may be
identiied as the most important part of the process of self-administration and
self-government in the system of democratic autonomy.12
To deine the smallest unit of representation as the most important is striking
and a key to the philosophy of communalism and democratic confederalism. The
anti-statist ideology of the Kurdish movement is to take the power of the state
and return it to the individual, employing the commune as the medium for this.
Every commune has to be seen as a political and moral unit of society. Radical democracy is seen as the opposite of the statist system, in
which the parliament is implementing rules on society. The system
of the communes means a system in which the executive comes from
below; it is formed by the city quarters and villages, where councils
are set up to give every individual the opportunity to participate in the
mechanisms of decision-making.13
We have seen, communes which constituted out of around 20–50 households,
although they can even be bigger, depending on the grade of social organization. This is also visible in the size of communes from 7–300 households, more
than 1500 communes in the Canton Cizîre and 18 communes in the small city
of Amude which form two quarter councils. Nobody is obliged to join a commune but everybody is able to use the services of the commune. Our (May
2014) research made in Hasaka, a city with a pre-war population approaching
two-hundred thousand, suggests an average of 50 households per commune in
16 quarters, with 29 communes in the quarter of Mifti, one of the most well10. Steps to widen the model of Democratic Autonomy were taken on the October 10,
2015 when the Syrian Defence Forces, a united multi-ethnic and multi-identical
defence force was founded, and on the March 17, 2016, when the committee for the
foundation of a Democratic Federation of Northern Syria/Rojava was proclaimed.
With this proclamation, it was underlined that democratic confederalism and democratic autonomy are not Kurdish projects, but projects for Syria as a whole. In
regions which aren´t predominantly Kurdish inhabited, like the region around Gîrê
Sipî (Tall Abyad), they are being implemented too.
11. Interview, Abdulselam Ahmed (Cochair of TEV-DEM), Hasaka, 21 May, 2014.
12. Cf. http://tr.hawarnews.com/rojava-devriminin-3-yili-5/.
13. Demokratik Özerklik (Demokratik Öz Yönetim), 2015, p.3

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016

Michael Knapp and Joost Jongerden
organized.14 While the communes and quarter councils are institutions of selfrepresentation of the population only, the city councils have a more expanded
make-up. In Hasaka, together with 101 individuals from the 16 quarter councils, a total of 30 individuals from civil society organizations were active on the
city council (comprising ive members of the PYD, ive of the liberal party, ive
of other parties, ive of the “civil institutions of families of martyrs,” ive of
the women’s movement Yekîtiya Star and ive of the youth movement Ciwanên
Șoreșger). The city council meets every two months and has elected 21 people
as a leading committee. While in the councils we can see decision-making performed through a combination of consensus and vote, the leading committee
only takes decisions by consensus.15
In the small town of Dêrîk (Al Malikiya) also, there is an average density of
around 50 households per commune. The density of communes is higher in
quarters with mainly a Kurdish population at the moment, but Arabic and Suryoye16 have started organizing themselves in communes, too.17 If one counts an
average of 20 communes per thousand (adult) inhabitants, then 50 people can
participate in each commune meeting.18 From our personal experience, the
actual attendance igure is much smaller, but still very reasonable in general,
with 10–25 participants. A 20–50% participation rate may be considered problematic; we would argue, the contrary, that it is strikingly high as a measure of
routine involvement in local politics. Also, as one of the thinkers of democratic
confederalism, Murray Bookchin (2015, 51–52), noted, full participation of the
half million or so residents in the Commune of Paris would have been logistically impossible, and as in Paris in 1793 so in Rojava today, participation cannot
be compulsory—not only because such an obligation would contradict the very
ethos of radical democracy. Rather, therefore, the focus is on building a working structure with people who want to participate.
The system of communes is very much in the process of development and one
can observe the creation of new communes and councils over the years. In the
normal practice of this system, the people are being empowered and encouraged to participate in the meetings of the commune and especially to go and take
14. The commune/quarter igure is an estimate and valid only for the areas under control of the self-administration; the relatively low quarter number is due to control
of part of the city by the Syrian state, and of some neighbourhoods by IS even; the
situation is constantly changing (only in the quarters under self-administration
was there a relative stability).
15. Interview, TEV-DEM, Hasaka, 21 May, 2014.
16. General name for the Christian population of various confessions.
17. Interview, Silvan Afrin, May 2014, Derik.
18. The minimum age for commune meeting participation is 16.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016
Communal Democracy

part when decisions against their will and interest are made. This means that
the entire decision-making process regarding needs and issues in the commune
vicinity is locally determined and completely accessible. Therefore, moreover,
commune activities extend beyond decision-making, as members interact and
become involved in cultural and social activities and also systematically visit
households to explain and discuss the decisions of the commune and to build
up a network to organize society. As a member of the quarter council of Hileli
in Qamislo explains, “Through the system of communes we know every single
family; we know their economic situation, who is beating his wife or his children,
and we go there and speak to the people affected, until a solution can be found.”19
In the ideology of the PKK as in the council movement in Rojava, women’s liberation plays a major role in democratising society. To this end, all structures
have a gender quota. No commune is able to decide anything without fulilling a
40% gender quota. All structures in democratic autonomy work like this and use
the model of co-chairpersonship (Hevserokatî). All posts at all levels of the selfadministration have to be co-occupied by at least one male and one female. For
example, the co-mayors of the city of Gire Sipî (Tall Abyad) are an Arab man and
a Kurdish woman.20 The women also represent the decisions of the autonomous
women’s movement, which has its own parallel structure at every stage of the system. In one discussion at a commune meeting witnessed by the irst author, the
people present were talking about a family who mistreated their young daughter
by locking her in at home. The women’s council of the commune explained their
decision to speak with the parents and the daughter and to observe the situation.
If the situation did not change and the girl agreed, they explained, then some sort
of a solution outside of the family would have to be found for the girl.
Discussions like the one above, on the young girl’s domestic situation, exemplify the idea of the commune as a practical means of democratising society to
some depth, not just as a supericial process paying lip-service to abstract ideas
about “the people.” To do this, the commune has its own public centres, the
people’s houses (Mala Gel) and parallel women’s house (Mala Jinan):
The mala gel was founded in 2012. When our cities were liberated these
were the irst [institutions] to be established. The mala gel is... well, it is
not a court, but a place where we people can ile our complaints. If you
have complaints about the government, if you have complaints about
your brother or neighbour, you can go to the mala gel. The mala gel tries
to resolve those complaints. If the mala gel can’t solve a problem, they’ll
make a ile and send it to the court. If the mala gel comes up with a solution and one or both of the parties doesn’t accept the solution, then the
19. Interview, Shirin Ibrahim Omar, Qamishlo, May 2014.
20. Research in Girê Sipî. MK, October 2015.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016

Michael Knapp and Joost Jongerden
case will go to the court, together with an evaluation by the mala. (...)
So, the mala gel is an institution that listens to complains and problems,
and offers mediation. (...) Most of the complaints at the mala gel are
about problems between husbands and wives or about land conlicts.21
The commune has become the most important part of the system of selfadministration in Rojava. In order to be able to address all kinds of problems,
the commune has taken up the model of committees. There are committees
for social-economy, health, defence and security, civil society, human rights,
women’s liberation, ecology, understanding, education, justice and youth. This
system of committees derives in part from a suggestion made by Abdullah
Öcalan in 2013 and adapted to the structures of democratic autonomy generally, such as the Congress for a Democratic Society (Demokratik Toplum Kongresi,
DTK)22 in northern Kurdistan/southeast Turkey.23 Silvan Afrin, from Yekîtiya
Star, described the commune committee structure and its operation thus:
The commune builds various committees. At least three people are
responsible for each committee… The committees are developed
according to their needs. If a committee can’t solve a problem, it will be
handed over to the quarter council. Peace committees have been set up,
and if there is dispute in the quarter it’s discussed and solved.24
In many cases, we observe more than ive people on committees, especially
in the defence committees.25 These committees try to cope with all the problems that can come up in society. At Hasaka, for example, the committee for
the economy is building up cooperatives under the control of the community,
while the commune for health looks at the medical needs of the population; the
defence committee functions as the irst line against attacks on the community,
including criminality, while the education committee is organizing teach-ins
every Friday and long term seminars for members.
Another example of the commune/committee system in its role of problem
identiication and resolution, as witnessed by the irst author in May, 2014, was
that of the organization of the electricity supply in the Xerbî quarter of Qamislo.
In this quarter, there are six communes with 25–30 people in each actively par21. Personal communication, SH, 27 November 2015.
22. The DTK is a platform of civil society groups, councils, and other parties working
for the creation of democratic autonomy in Northern Kurdistan as a confederation of the organizations of Kurdish society. On 14th July, 2011, an assembly of 800
organization representatives on the DTK declared democratic autonomy in Northern Kurdistan.
23. http://ozgur-gundem.com/haber/109668/kongreden-ilk-adim-8-komisyon.
24. Interview, Silvan Afrin, Derik, May 2014.
25. Çimen, Ahmet, http://yeniozgurpolitika.org/index.php?rupel=nuce&id=32757.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016
Communal Democracy

ticipating. The communes came together at a quarter council assembly to solve
the problem of pollution caused by generators operating at every house and
collected money from NGOs and the population to buy a generator which is
now providing electricity for more than 230 households at least ten hours a day.
A committee of ive people was created to look after the generator (turn it on
and off, organize its fuel provisioning and deal with any maintenance issues).
Here, we observe how the “higher institutions,” like quarter councils, operate
at the system of commune confederation to handle problems that a single commune cannot. The communes link to the quarter councils by reporting on their
activities and meeting weekly in the Mala Gel. The quarter councils report to the
city council and meet monthly with the city assembly, at which the city council
as communal institution participates and executes the decisions of the assemblies, and a plan for the next month is made.26 Importantly, the self-administrative structures with the greatest power are the smaller, local structures,
because they both directly solve problems and deine the discussions made in
the higher councils. Indeed, one may say, the higher the council, the lesser its
power in democratic confederalism. (c.f. Bookchin 1996, 320).
This brings us to the topic of social acceptance and dual power. Rojava is a
region of diverse cultural and religious backgrounds, and even in the Kurdish community there is a wide spectrum of asynchrony in the development of
the concept of active citizenship. A study made by the Institute for Strategic
Research based in Qamislo on the support for democratic autonomy in Cizîre
Canton in December 2013 found that 84% of the population had a positive view
on that model.27 We cannot say how representative this statistic is, but clearly
there is at least a signiicant minority that appears not to accept the model of
democratic autonomy and self-representation through the council system, or
at least its present operation there. This might be one of the reasons why a
parallel, dual structure is being established. Besides the council system there is
a parliament, with its seat in Amude. There, all parties ready to participate are
represented, forming, together with the councils and NGOs, the government of
Rojava. Elections at canton level have thus far not been possible because of the
war situation and the permanent luctuation of the population.
The cooperation of this dual structure is manifested in the parliament of
Amude, where the traditional parties, as well as TEV-Dem council delegates
and civil society organizations participate. TEV-Dem is playing a big role in the
administration of Rojava as an umbrella organization for democratic autonomy. On one hand, it is an alliance of 56 councils, civil society organizations and
26. Çimen, Ahmet, yeniozgurpolitika.org/index.php?rupel=nuce&id=32757.
27. www.navendalekolin.com/haber-3836-JI-SEDI-611-HIKUMETA-HEREMA-KURDISTANE-LI-DIJI-REVEBIRIYA-XWESERE.html

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016

Michael Knapp and Joost Jongerden
political parties28. A PYD representative explains: “TEV-DEM is mainly a consultative body that deals with the relationships between the entities [a concept
referring to ethnic, cultural or religious groups] and a dialogue between political parties, but it has no executive power.”29 On the other hand, it does provide
the initiative for establishing and building new councils and supporting new
communes. Civil society participates through TEV-Dem and through its own
organizations themselves in the parliament, too, with women’s, religious and
other social groups. All ministerial chair posts in the parliament are occupied
by at least one man and one women, as mentioned (above), but positive discriminating in favour of minorities like Ezîdîs (Yezidis). Unlike in conventional
parliamentarism, however, parties are not dominant; they are represented in
the same way as, for example, teachers unions or other NGOs.
Six parties participate in TEV-Dem: the PYD (the party with the most support
in Rojava), the Liberal Party, the Communist Party of Kurdistan, the National
Kurdistan Union Party (Muhammed Abbas), the Peace and Democracy Party
(Adulkerim Zekho) and one wing of the PDKS (the wing of PDKS which refers to
the Barzani family to Mustafa Barzani but is critical on the policy of Mesud Barzani). Arabic and Syriac parties, like the National Arabic Commission and the
Syriac Union party, also participate in the administration. Members of the parties that do not boycott the system of Rojava in general acquire high positions,
up to the Kobanê Canton’s co-minister for foreign affairs Idriss Nassan (Syria
Kurdistan Democratic Party, Suriye Kürdistan Demokrat Partisi, PDK-S). This integration of parties into the self-administration of Rojava has led to splits in many
parties with one wing siding with Rojava and one wing with the PDK of Barzani.
Finally, the multitude of identities in society is also represented at various levels. In the parliament, as in every council, there are various methods employed to
facilitate this. People represent themselves in the communes and councils irst,
as people of Rojava or as inhabitants of a canton, a city, quarter or street. Then,
as mentioned, women´s councils are constructed parallel to every structure and
elect their own chairwomen and have their own representation in the councils. In councils that include a population of mixed major identities, like Ezîdîs,
Suryoyes or Arabs, there will be always a quota of people from that group on the
board of the council. Finally, there is the sector of civil society, where all identity
groups organize their own autonomous institutions that represent themselves
28. Apart from the Democratic Union Party PYD, the following parties are member of
TEV-DEM: Partiya Aştiya Demokratîk Kurdi li Sûriyeyê (Peace and Democracy Party
of Kurdish Syria), Partiya Kumonîst a Kurdistanê (Communist Party of Kurdistan),
Kombuna Niştimanî Kurdistanî (National Assembly of Kurdistan), Partiya Yekîtiya
Lîbralî ya Kurdistanî (Liberal Union Party of Kurdistan), Partiya Demokratîk Kurdistantî li Sûriyeyê (Kurdistan Democrati Party in Syria)
29. Personal communication, SH, 27 November 2015.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016
Communal Democracy

together with the political parties, labour organizations and other structures,
like human rights groups, at all levels and stages of democratic autonomy and
work as a kind of control against discrimination and sectarianism.

Discussion
Doing research on the development of the council system in Rojava means taking series of snapshots and witnessing a process unfolding. This is part of the
logic of democratic confederalism, which is constructed bottom-up. Smaller cities, like Derik, of around 26 thousand inhabitants according to the 2004 census,
are organized as several “communes” (komun) at the level of neighbourhoods,
which have their representatives in a city council (meclise bajar). The city council has its representatives again in the council of the Canton of Cezîre, which
again has its representatives in the Coordination of the Rojava Cantons, which
includes the Cezîre, Kobanê and Afrin cantons. Larger cities, like Qamislo, with
a population of 184 thousand according to the 2004 census, may have several
communes in a neighbourhood, and therefore not only communes and a city
council, but in between also a forum for deliberation between communes at the
neighbourhood level. The idea is that communes take responsibility over their
own neighbourhoods, and that when the city-council wants a project executed
in a neighbourhood, this is done in consultation and with the approval of the
communes. In our experience, every visit to the region gives new insights into
the unfolding reality and relations of institutions and people to one another
(in the war situation). Therefore we see democratic autonomy not so much as
model of being, but as a working practise based on the idea of self-government,
and if one likes, a model of becoming. Institutions are lexible and adaptable,
changing their roles in time and space. Therefore, all deinitions of institutions
are methodologically provisional. This shows us the impossibility of giving a
ixed deinition on a status quo in Rojava and its administrative structuring.
The Rojava experience—if we may call it that—is above all a radicalization of
the idea of democracy. It is not based on the idea of state and its individualized
relations with citizens but on the idea of social subjects. As such, it contrasts
with the social contract or contractarian model, based on the idea of “an atomic
individual coming into society as a contracting agent” (Ferguson 2007), which
creates a direct personal submission towards the state and a destruction of relations among people, bringing democracy into the early modern conception,
when it was considered to be the rule of everyone by everyone (for a discussion
see: Jongerden 2015). This brings to the fore the tension between democracy
as the rule of everyone by everyone and democracy as a system of representation (Hardt and Negri 2004, 240). Representation not only implies a connection
between the represented and representative, but also disconnects the rulers
from the ruled: “When our power is transferred to a group of rulers, then we no
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016

Michael Knapp and Joost Jongerden
longer rule, we are separated from power and government” (Hardt and Negri
2004, 244). Representation does not only separate people from power, but also
turns politics from a public capacity into a private one, resulting in a separation
of people from one another, the second problem.
The ballot box engages the capacity of private choice, since it is based on
giving people a right in their private capacity, the right to vote. But political
action, Hannah Arendt argues, involves standing in front of others to form
opinions, the space of a plurality of perspectives on which proper opinions on
political topics can be formed (Sitton 1987). The ballot box does not provide
a space to be public and political, but only one to act privately and express a
preference among alternatives presented. Political activity cannot be narrowed
down to the individual right of choice, since is also about a public engagement
with others; as Arendt (1958, 57) notes, the signiicance of being seen and being
heard by others derives signiicance from the fact that everybody sees and
hears from a different position. For Arendt, freedom is the freedom to act as citizens, and this means to participate, to be heard, to debate, to exchange views
and to make decisions. Freedom, therefore, is not about giving people power
in the private capacity, but about people being empowered in their capacity
as citizens though the establishment of a public space. Thus does Arendt (1990
[1963], 253) refer to council democracy as a treasure of the revolutionary tradition, the public space that people historically created to form opinion and make
decisions, to rule themselves as related to one another.
Assembly democracy implies the forming of opinions “in a process of open discussion and public debate;” people need to become proactive, to lead the process,
since it would not sufice were we merely ‘supporting, while action remained the
prerogative of government.’ (Arendt, 1990 [1963]: 268-9, 271) It is precisely this relationship that the co-chair of the PYD, Salih Müslüm, criticizes, arguing that the
relations between state and people in the Middle East over the past decades have
been conceptualized and practiced in terms of an active state with the people as
its objects, while the new model of democratic autonomy and democratic confederalism is based on active citizenship, with people as subjects in their capacity to decide and act, debating problems and enacting solutions by the people
and for the people.30 In a similar vein, Cemil Bayık31 (personal communication,
Ocotober 30, 2014) and Duran Kalkan (personal communication, Ocotober 30,
2014) argue that this paradigm shift includes, among other things, a move from
state-building to society-building, and, relatedly, from taking power (“iktidar,”
30. Salih Müslüm speaking at the Conference on New Models and a Solution of the Kurdish
Issue, Flemish Parliament, Brussels, 19 September, 2013.
31. Cemil Bayik is the co-chairperson of the KCK, the umbrella organization for democratic autonomy working in all parts of Kurdistan and among the diaspora.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016
Communal Democracy

as in state or sovereign power) to the development of societal self-governing
capacities.
We may refer to the ruling of ourselves as the art of citizenship, or the art of
democracy. One problem resulting from the separation of people from politics in
representative democracy is that people do not acquire the skills for self-administration. Such a reskilling is also a part of council democracy, as revealed in the
words of one of its practitioners. “Our aim,” explained the chair of a council in
a poor neighbourhood in Diyarbakir, “is to face the problems in our lives, in our
neighbourhood, and solve them by ourselves without being dependent on or in
need of the state.” A member of the council added, “We try to live without the
state”—but, he tempered, “the idea of the state is nestled in the minds of people
and it is dificult to make people think about politics without referring to the
state, so we are both practicing self-organization and learning to understand
what it is by doing it” (Jongerden and Akkaya 2013, 183–184).
Many of our interlocutors told us that it was very dificult to build up an
autonomous self-administration, since the Syrian state had been very centralist and the people were used to being cared for by the state and its communal
services: “The people were not used to taking their own decisions, to solve their
own needs by themselves… We overcome that attitude with education.”32 The
statist model is interpreted historically by the Kurdish movement to have taken
power from the people not only in the form of the right of self-administration
but also in the form of knowledge. Knowledge has been specialized and access
reduced to a class of “experts.” We can interpret this method, too as a way of
breaking with the individualism of capitalist modernity, which produces competing individuals who are kept unable to understand the context in which they
act. Most people feel like they are unable to participate on an equal level in matters of policy or economy. This process is thought to be reversed in the democratic autonomy model by a network of academies. Many of the topics that are
currently discussed in these academies concern the building of a democratic,
gender-equal society and economy. This aim also involves changing the notion
of citizenship—because under the modern regimes in Syria and Turkey, many
kinds of self-organization had been criminalized and institutions and necessities taken over and provided by the state. Therefore, education in this sense
means empowerment and self-empowerment/self-government.

32. Interview, Silvan Afrin, Derik, May 2014.
The education is organized by the youth movement and the self-administered Nurî
Dersimî [Lesson] academies Ahmet Çimen, http://yeniozgurpolitika.org/index.
php?rupel=nuce&id=32757.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016

Michael Knapp and Joost Jongerden
Conclusions
In this article, we started with a general discussion about council democracy,
beginning with the Paris Commune and then moving to the development of
the concept of democratic autonomy based on the historical background of the
Middle East. Rojava is then presented as an example of the practical implementation of democratic autonomy. The idea of allocating decision-making powers to local councils (communes) does not come with an inwardly oriented or
parochial form of militant particularism. On the contrary, the concept of confederalism evokes a sense of connectedness, locally based and in an ascending
order of territorial size. This is a conceptualization of places and the people
who live there not thought of in terms of discrete and separate entities, but
as related to and thence comprising one another. This potentially has major
implications. “Most of the scholarship on citizenship,” argues Sassen (2002,
277), “has claimed a necessary connection to the national state.” In the social
contract developed in the context of the struggle in Rojava, it is not the relation
between state and people that operates but that of people in local communities.
This is a social contract that reclaims citizenship from the state, an inclusive
and emancipatory citizenship.
The realization of the project of democratic autonomy comes in part from the
necessities of surviving in a war situation, as well as the grass-roots work the
Kurdish movement has undertaken in the last decades in the region. To hinder
parochialism and the methodological individualism and to realize such a confederate system, a change to a system of active and activist citizenship is being
realized through education and the appeal of the social practice of the project
—active in the manner of participating in the already established and operative
councils under the social contract of Rojava, and activist in the sense of developing new creative forms of coexistence, civil society and self-representation.
We can already see the results of this still unfolding development in shared
self-organization and self-representation by all ethnicities and identities of the
region representing a strong alternative to the monistic national state.
Local self-government within the context of democratic confederalism is not
based on separation from others, but on extending itself. This then foregrounds
the issue of how we relate to one another, including what Massey (2004, 17)
refers to as a “responsibility towards the wider relations on which we depend.”
What this means in practice, of course, remains to be seen, since, in the words
of Marx on the meaning of the Paris Commune, it entails a “practical learning
of extending relations” (quoted in Ross 2015, 90). Manifestly, any replacement
of the state by a confederal system represents a thorough transformation of
the very essence of the body politic. Yet it is impelled. The emphasis on active
citizenship and interconnectivity in the project of democratic autonomy and
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016
Communal Democracy

democratic confederalism has the potential to create inclusive geographies;
democratic confederalism brings into focus the rights of people to take control
over their own affairs as well as the way to relate to others in so doing.

References
Akkaya, A. H. and J. Jongerden. 2013. “Confederalism and autonomy in Turkey:
The Kurdistan Workers’ Party and the reinvention of democracy.” The
Kurdish Question in Turkey: New Perspectives on Violence, Representation and
Reconciliation, edited by C. Gunes and W. Zeydanlioglu, 186–214. London, Routledge.
Allsopp, H. 2014. The Kurds of Syria: Political Parties and Identity in the Middle East.
New York: IB Taurus.
Arendt, H. 1958. The Human Condition. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago
Press.
———. 1990 [1963]. On Revolution. London: Penguin Press.
Biehl, J. 2012. “Bookchin, Öcalan, and the Dialectics of Democracy.” Challenging
Capitalist Modernity: Alternative Concepts and the Kurdish Quest, 3-5 February 2012. Hamburg.
Bookchin, M. 1990. “The meaning of confederalism.” Green Perspectives 20.
http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/Anarchist_Archives/bookchin/gp/perspectives20.html
———. 1991. ‘Libertarian Municipalism: an overview.’ Green Perspectives October.
http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/Anarchist_Archives/bookchin/
gp/perspectives24.html
———. 1996. Die Agonie der Stadt. Grafenau: Trotzdem Verlag.
———. 2015. The Next Revolution. London: Verso.
Ferguson, S. C. 2007. “Social Contract as Bourgeois Ideology.” Cultural Logic: An
Electronic Journal of Marxist Theory and Practice, 1–19.
Gunes, C. and R. Lowe. 2015. The Impact of the Syrian war on Kurdish Politics Across
the Middle East: London: Chatham House.
Hardt, M. and T. Negri. 2004. Multitude. New York, Penguin Press.
Isin, E. 2008. Theorizing Acts of Citizenship. London: Zed Books.
Jongerden, Joost. 2015. “Radicalizing Democracy.” In Research Turkey, March
17, 2015.
Jongerden, J. and A. H. Akkaya. 2013. “Democratic Confederalism as a Kurdish
Spring: the PKK and the quest for radical democracy.” In The Kurdish
Spring: Geopolitical Changes and the Kurds, edited by M. Ahmet and M.
Gunter, 163–185. Costa Mesa, Mazda Publishers.
Kropotkin, P. 1947 [1897]. The State: It’s Historical Role. London: Freedom Press.
Marx, K. 2009. Civil War in France. Gloucester: Dodo Press.
Massey, D. 2004. “Geographies of Responsibility.” Geograiska Annaler Series B, 86,
Part 1: 5–18. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.0435-3684.2004.00150.x

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016

Michael Knapp and Joost Jongerden
Morgan, L. H. 1881. Houses and House-Life of the American Aborigines. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Öcalan, A. 2008. Prison Notes, June 18, 2008. (unpublished).
———. 2010a. Demokratik Uygarlık Manifestosu: ortaduğu’da uygarlik krizi ve
demokratik uygarlık çözümü. Neuss: Mezopotamya Yayınları.
———. 2010b. Jenseits von Staat, Macht und Gewalt. Neus: Mesopotamien Verlag.
———. 2013. Liberating Life: Women’s Revolution. Neus: Mesopotamien Publishers.
Ross, K. 2015. Communal Luxury, the political imaginary of the Paris Commune. London: Verso.
Rousseau J-J. 2002 [1762]. The Social Contract and First and Second Discourses. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Sassen, S. 2002. “Towards Post-National and Denationalized Citizenship.” In
Handbook of Citizenship Studies, edited by E. F. Isin and B. S. Turner, 277–
291. London: Sage. http://dx.doi.org/10.4135/9781848608276.n17
Sitton, J. F. 1987. “Hannah Arendt’s Argument for Council Democracy.” Polity
20(1): 80–100. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3234938
Strangers In A Tangled Wilderness. 2015. A Small Key Can Open A Large Door: The
Rojava Revolution. Oakland: AK Press.
Tejel, J. 2009. Syria’s Kurds: History, Politics and Society. London: Routledge.
Weber, M. 2000. Die protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus. Weinhem:
Beltz Atheneum Verlag.
———. 2005. Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Zweitausendeins.
White, D. 2008. Bookchin: A Critical Appraisal. London: Pluto Press.

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2016
