Resistance Marxist Library

On the
Emancipation
of Women

V.I Lenin
On the Emancipation of Women

Acknowledgement: “Methods and Forms of Work Among Communist Party Women”
© Pluto Press, London; reprinted by permission.

Resistance Books 2003
ISBN 1876646 03 9
Published by Resistance Books: resistancebooks.com

Contents
Introduction by Lisa Macdonald ............................................................. 5
Articles & Speeches by V.I. Lenin

From The Development of Capitalism in Russia
VI. Capitalist Manufacture & Capitalist Domestic Industry ........................ 17
VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry ............................ 18
From The Draft Program of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party ...... 21
From The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart ...................................... 24
Civilised Europeans & Savage Asians .................................................................. 26
A Great Technical Achievement .......................................................................... 28
Capitalism & Female Labour ............................................................................... 30
The Working Class & Neomalthusianism ........................................................... 32
Fifth International Congress Against Prostitution .............................................. 35
Petty Production in Agriculture ........................................................................... 37
To Inessa Armand (1) ........................................................................................... 40
To Inessa Armand (2) ........................................................................................... 42
From A Caricature of Marxism & Imperialist Economism ................................ 45
From Tasks of the Left Zimmerwaldists in the Swiss Social-Democratic
Party ................................................................................................................ 48
From The Tasks of the Proletariat in Our Revolution ........................................ 49
From Materials Relating to the Revision of the Party Program.......................... 50
From Can the Bolsheviks Retain State Power? .................................................... 54
Speech at the First All-Russia Congress of Working Women ........................... 59
From Draft Program of the RCP(B) .................................................................... 61
From A Great Beginning ...................................................................................... 62
The Tasks of the Working Women’s Movement in the Soviet Republic ........... 65
Soviet Power & the Status of Women ................................................................. 70
To the Bureau of the Women’s Congress in Petrograd Gubernia .................... 73
To the Working Women...................................................................................... 74
On International Working Women’s Day .......................................................... 76
Greetings to the All-Russia Conference of Gubernia Soviet Women’s
On the Emancipation of Women
Departments ......................................................................................................... 78
International Working Women’s Day ................................................................. 79
Message of Greetings to the Conference of Representatives of
Women’s Departments of the Peoples of Soviet Regions &
Republics in the East ...................................................................................... 81
From The Fourth Anniversary of the October Revolution ................................ 82
From On the Significance of Militant Materialism .............................................. 84
To the Nonparty Conference of Factory & Peasant Women of
Moscow City & Moscow Gubernia ............................................................... 86

Appendices
1. From The Program of the Communist Party of Russia .............. 87
2. From The ABC of Communism by Nikolai Bukharin
& Evgeny Preobrazhensky ............................................................ 88
3. From My Recollections of Lenin by Clara Zetkin ........................ 91
4. Methods & Forms of Work Among Communist Party
Women: Theses ......................................................................... 112
Basic principles ............................................................................................. 112
Methods & forms of work among women ................................................. 117
Party work among women in the soviet countries ..................................... 119
In bourgeois-capitalist countries ................................................................. 121
In the economically backward countries (the East) ..................................... 122
Methods of agitation & propaganda ........................................................... 124
The structure of the departments ............................................................... 126
On international work .................................................................................. 128
5. From the Old Family to the New by Leon Trotsky .................... 129
6. The Protection of Motherhood & the Struggle for Culture
by Leon Trotsky ......................................................................... 136
7. The Revolution Betrayed by Leon Trotsky ................................ 146

Notes ................................................................................................. 156
Glossary ............................................................................................ 163

Introduction
By Lisa Macdonald
The persistence of gender inequality in the most advanced capitalist societies, with the
most complete bourgeois democracy in which women have full formal equality, has
put paid to the idea that women’s liberation is possible within the framework of
capitalism, even in its “healthiest” periods of expansion. Today, in a period of global
capitalist stagnation and crisis, as the “gender gap” widens and women, especially in
the Third World, bear the brunt of the capitalist class’s neoliberal offensive against the
working class as a whole, the correctness of the Marxist analysis of women’s oppression
as a cornerstone of class society and its revolutionary approach to achieving women’s
liberation is clearer than ever before.
Since Karl Marx and Frederick Engels first developed their materialist conception
of history in the 1840s, Marxism has sought to understand and combat the specific
oppression of women. Engels’ explanation of the roots of women’s oppression in the
main institutions of class society — private property and the family — rather than in
the realm of the natural or biological, was an enormous advance, laying the foundations
for a scientific approach to women’s plight which posed, for the first time, liberation as
possible.
In his 1884 work The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State,1 Engels
identified the source of the oppression of women as their exclusion from social
production and the conversion of household tasks into a private service. Both resulted
from the replacement of collective production and communal property ownership
with private male ownership of the basic means of production during the emergence
of class society.
In preclass societies, there was no material basis for exploitative relations between
the sexes. Males and females participated in social production, the labour of both
sexes being necessary to ensure the survival of the human group as a whole. The social
Lisa Macdonald is a member of the Socialist Alliance.
On the Emancipation of Women

status of men and women reflected the indispensable roles that each played.
The change in women’s status occurred alongside the growing productivity of human
labour as a result of developments in productive technologies, and the private appropriation
of the resulting economic surplus. With the possibility for some humans to prosper from
the exploitation of the labour of others, women, because of their role in reproduction
(both to maintain the existing generation and reproduce the next generation), became
valuable property. Like slaves and cattle, they were a source of wealth: they alone could
produce new human beings whose labour power could be exploited.
Thus the purchase of women by men, along with all rights to their future offspring,
arose as one of the economic and social institutions of the new order based on private
property. Women’s primary social role was increasingly defined as domestic servant
and child-bearer until, with the development of urban centres based on crafts and
trade, their independent role in social production was excluded altogether.
The oppression of women was thus institutionalised through the family system.
Women’s role in production came to be determined by the family to which they
belonged, by the man to whom they were subordinate. They were rendered
economically dependent. In the words of Engels:
The modern individual family is based on the open or disguised domestic enslavement
of the woman; and modern society is a mass composed solely of individual families as
its molecules. Today, in the great majority of cases, the man has to be the earner, the
breadwinner of the family, at least among the propertied classes, and this gives him a
dominating position which requires no special legal privileges. In the family, he is the
bourgeois; the wife represents the proletariat.

The class divisions of society — between those who possessed property and those
who, owning no property, had to work for others to live — were perpetuated through
the legal institution of monogamous marriage, which enabled private property to be
passed from one generation to the next. The consolidation of the sexual division of
labour in the family also enabled the propertied class to abrogate responsibility for the
upkeep of members of society they could not immediately exploit (children, the elderly
and sick).
In so far as the family, founded on the oppression of women, arose as an
indispensable pillar of class society, it follows that women cannot be liberated without
dismantling class society itself. While the development of industrial capitalism created
the material conditions that made gender equality possible by incorporating women
into waged work and giving them a degree of economic independence from men, and
while advanced capitalism granted women full legal rights, women have and will remain
the “second sex” for so long as private property, and the economic and social shackles

Introduction
of the family which prop it up, remain intact. In Engels’ words:
The democratic republic does not abolish the antagonism between the two classes; on
the contrary, it provides the field on which it is fought out. And, similarly, the peculiar
character of man’s domination over woman in the modern family, and the necessity,
as well as the manner, of establishing real social equality between the two, will be
brought out in full relief only when both are completely equal before the law. It will
then become evident that the first premise for the emancipation of women is the
reintroduction of the entire female sex into public industry; and that this again demands
that the quality possessed by the individual family of being the economic unit of
society be abolished.

That is, for gender inequality to be abolished, not only must women be brought fully
into production, but private domestic labour must be replaced by socialised services.
With the passage of the means of production into common property, the individual
family ceases to be the economic unit of society. Private housekeeping is transformed
into a social industry. The care and education of children becomes a public matter.

It was this understanding of the origins of women’s oppression, and therefore the
path to women’s full liberation, that informed the most thoroughgoing and successful
program yet implemented for the emancipation of women — in the early years of the
Russian Revolution.

Deconstructing the family
The Bolshevik-led revolution in Russia indicated the potential for the liberation of
women that comes from a successful struggle against capitalist rule. The measures
enacted by the new Marxist government under the leadership of Vladimir Lenin and
Leon Trotsky demonstratively showed that the proletarian revolution meant immediate
and substantial steps forward for women.
Between 1917 and 1927, the Soviet government passed a series of laws giving women
legal equality with men for the first time. Striking at the heart of women’s oppression, the
1918 Code on Marriage, the Family and Guardianship was the most progressive family
legislation the world has yet seen. It recognised only civil marriage which, by 1927 was a
simple registration process based on mutual consent, and enabled divorce at the request
of either partner. In 1926, de facto relationships were given legal equality.
The code abolished illegitimacy and endeavoured to make familial relations
independent of the marriage contract. It also abolished adoption as the first step in
transferring child-care from the family to the state, and separated property ownership
and inheritance from marriage.
All children were entitled to financial support when their parents separated, and
On the Emancipation of Women

women with children consistently won significant payments through the courts. For
single mothers, where individual paternity could not be established, often all the men
named by the woman as possible fathers were ordered to pay support.
Abortion was made free and legal at any stage in pregnancy and laws giving the
foetus human rights were abolished. Antihomosexual laws were eliminated in 1918.
Gender discrimination in hiring and firing workers was forbidden, prostitution was
decriminalised and legislation gave women workers special maternity benefits.
Even given this enormous progress, the Bolsheviks understood clearly the limitations
of formal gender equality. They recognised that only when the household tasks
performed by millions of individual unpaid women are transferred to the public sphere,
taken over by paid workers, would women be free to enter the public sphere on an
equal basis with men — equally educated, waged and able to pursue their own individual
goals and development. Under such circumstances, free union would gradually replace
marriage as relationships were constructed and deconstructed unrestrained by the
deforming pressure of economic dependency. The family, stripped of its previous
social functions, would gradually wither away, leaving in its place fully autonomous,
equal individuals living in relationships based on love and mutual respect.
In his 1919 speech “A Great Beginning”, reprinted in this collection, Lenin
emphasised the centrality to women’s emancipation of socialising domestic labour:
Notwithstanding all the laws emancipating woman, she continues to be a domestic
slave, because petty housework crushes, strangles, stultifies and degrades her, chains her
to the kitchen and the nursery, and she wastes her labour on barbarously unproductive,
petty, nerve racking, stultifying and crushing drudgery. The real emancipation of
women, real communism, will begin only where and when an all out struggle begins
(led by the proletariat wielding state power) against this petty housekeeping, or rather
when its wholesale transformation into a large scale socialist economy begins.

The limitations of backwardness
While considerable resources were allocated to establishing public child-care, kitchen
and laundry facilities, especially during the period of war communism, the Bolsheviks
were acutely aware that the facilities were insufficient and not nearly of high enough
quality. Many of the speeches by Lenin and Trotsky reprinted here reflect the Bolsheviks’
frustration at the material limitations on their ability to implement their program for
dismantling the family and freeing women.
The catastrophic decline of the productive forces in Russia as a result of the civil
war and the imperialist military intervention and economic blockade that followed the
revolution had created terrible conditions of scarcity in the country. At the end of the

Introduction
civil war in 1920, national income was less than one-third of the 1913 figure and
industrial production less than one-fifth of the prewar level. And as the civil war
ended, Russia’s chief agricultural regions were hit by drought; the resulting famine
claimed 2 million lives.
At the time of the revolution, the overwhelming bulk of Russia’s population were
peasants (consequently the family was still the main unit of production); only 30%
were literate; and far fewer had the knowledge and skills needed to rebuild an industrial
economy. While a certain economic revival began with the introduction of the New
Economic Policy in 1921, the situation in postrevolutionary Russia can only be described,
to use Marx’s term, as one of “generalised want”.
In his chapter “Thermidor in the Family” in The Revolution Betrayed (Appendix 7),
Trotsky remarked:
Taking the old family by storm proved impossible. This was not for lack of determination,
or because the family was so close to people’s hearts. On the contrary, after a brief
period of mistrust of the state, and of its creches, child-care centres and similar
institutions, women workers, and after them forward-looking peasant women as well,
realised the immeasurable advantages of socialised child-care, and of the socialisation of
the whole family economy. Unfortunately, Soviet society proved too poor, and its
cultural level too low, for this goal to be reached. The actual resources of the state did
not match the plans and intentions of the Communist Party. The family could not be
“abolished”; it had to be replaced. The real liberation of women was unattainable on the
basis of “collectivised scarcity”.

In her book Women, the State and Revolution,2 Wendy Z. Goldman documents in
some detail the huge barriers that the economic underdevelopment of the country
presented to implementing the Bolsheviks’ program for women’s liberation. In every
sphere — from divorce and alimony arrangements, to abortion access, to affirmative
action in the workplace — the ability of Soviet women to make full use of their new
rights was undermined by the inability of the government to rapidly solve the larger
social problems of extensive poverty, unemployment and lack of social services.
The limitations imposed by economic underdevelopment were exacerbated by
the backward social relations and attitudes that prevailed at the time. Feudal traditions
and customs still imbued society, not only in the peasantry but also in significant
sections of the unskilled workers who had only recently been drawn into industrial
production.
The 1919 program of the Russian Communist Party stated: “The party’s task at the
present moment is primarily work in the realm of ideas and education so as to destroy
utterly all traces of the former inequality and prejudices, particularly among backward
On the Emancipation of Women

strata of the proletariat and peasantry.” At the centre of this battle against backward
ideas about women’s and men’s roles in society was the Bolsheviks’ tireless struggle to
involve more women directly in politics. In his speech, reprinted in this collection, “The
Tasks of the Working Women’s Movement in the Soviet Republic”, presented to a
conference of working women in 1919, Lenin said:
In order to be active in politics under the old, capitalist regime special training was
required, so that women played an insignificant part in politics, even in the most
advanced and free capitalist countries. Our task is to make politics available to every
working woman … The participation of working women is essential — not only of
Party members and politically conscious women, but of the non party women and
those who are least politically conscious. … The work that Soviet power has begun can
only make progress when, instead of a few hundreds, millions and millions of women
throughout Russia take part in it. We are sure that the cause of socialist development
will then become sound.

Despite the massive economic and social difficulties the Bolsheviks confronted after
the revolution, the advances for women of the Soviet Union between 1917-1930 were
remarkable. Just how remarkable is made clear when the situation of Soviet women in
the 1920s is compared to the state of women’s rights in the far more technologically
and economically advanced capitalist societies almost a century later — where women
in parts of the United States may soon be charged with infanticide for having an
abortion, where employed men get rewarded with tax discounts if their wife stays at
home full time, where single mothers are being increasingly penalised for not being
economically dependent on the fathers of their children, and where almost all public
policy extends rather than ameliorates women’s unpaid familial tasks.
Indeed, in the advanced capitalist countries, it was not until the “second wave” of
feminism in the late 1960s and 1970s, after the “first wave” had won for western
women the basic democratic rights, that many elements of the Bolsheviks’ program
for women’s liberation became core demands of the movement.

A question of consciousness
The Bolsheviks did not conceive of and implement such a thoroughgoing program for
women’s liberation because they themselves were all or mostly women. In fact, while
around 10% of party members in 1917 were women, and while the October revolution
mobilised millions more women, the prevailing social conditions, which made
participation in politics very difficult for women, meant that the new government was
comprised largely of men.
Nor were the advances for women forced out of the Bolsheviks by mass pressure. On

Introduction
the contrary, to the extent that there was any feminist movement in Russia at the time, it
was largely composed of, and led by, bourgeois women, whose demands for rights only
for women of property reflected their lack of concern for the conditions of life for the
majority of peasant and working-class women. The Bolsheviks therefore had to lead
strongly from the front, against both the limits of liberal reformism and the generally
backward attitudes on gender relations, not least among the mass of exploited women.
Rather, such progress towards the emancipation of women was made because the
Bolshevik revolution was a profoundly conscious revolution led by Marxists who had
a thorough understanding of the foundations and character of class oppression in all
its forms, and how to dismantle it by mobilising all the oppressed for their own
interests.
At the heart of Marxists’ singularly consistent championing of women’s rights is
their understanding that the struggle for women’s liberation is central to the struggle
for socialism — both before and after the socialist revolution. It is not just that, as
Lenin put it, “The proletariat cannot achieve complete liberty until it has won complete
liberty for women”. It is also that the process of constructing that complete liberty is a
thoroughly conscious one and requires the active involvement of the majority of
society. Freeing and encouraging women to organise in every sphere against their
specific oppression as women provides the best conditions within which they can
develop class consciousness and join the struggle to overthrow capitalism and then to
build a socialist society.

Women & the revolutionary party
In the course of the many debates and experiments undertaken in carrying out this
perspective in the new Soviet Union, the basic elements of a Marxist party’s approach
to women’s liberation work were worked out. Reviewing these reveals that most of the
questions we confront today regarding the relationship between a revolutionary party
and an independent feminist movement, and its leadership, are not new.
The Bolsheviks’ point of departure was that socialist women should be in the
socialist party, not organised separately. The Theses on Methods and Forms of Work
among Communist Party Women that were adopted by the Third Congress of the
Communist International in July 1921, and are reprinted in this collection, noted: “All
women who fight for the emancipation of woman and the recognition of her rights
must have as their aim the creation of a communist society. But communism is also
the final aim of the proletariat as a whole and therefore, in the interests of both sides,
the two struggles must be fought as ‘a single and indivisible struggle’.” In this framework,
the Bolsheviks campaigned tirelessly to recruit women activists to their organisation
On the Emancipation of Women

and leadership.
The correctness of this emphasis on integrating women and the struggle for
women’s liberation fully into the socialist project and therefore the party is revealed
most clearly in the consequences of later communist parties’ departure from this
approach under the influence of the bourgeois feminist movements. In the Communist
Party of Australia, for example, but also in many other communist parties, the separate
organisation of women members — in women-only party caucuses and committees
— resulted in the marginalisation and ghettoisation of both many women activists and
“women’s issues”.
The Bolsheviks were adamant that the winning of women’s emancipation must be
the work of the whole party, not just the women in the party. As Lenin constantly
pointed out, Marxists’ approach to organisational questions must flow from their
political analyses, and there is no “women’s issue” that is not also of vital importance
to the entire revolutionary movement and struggle.
Lenin had to fight for this antiseparatist approach within the Third International.
As he told Zetkin:
[The national sections] regard agitation and propaganda among women and the task
of rousing and revolutionising them as of secondary importance, as the job of just the
women communists. None but the latter are rebuked because the matter does not
move ahead more quickly and strongly. This is wrong, fundamentally wrong! It is
outright separatism. It is equality of women … reversed … In the final analysis, it is an
underestimation of women and of their accomplishments.

At the same time as insisting on an antiseparatist approach to party members, the
Bolsheviks stressed the need for special sections in all socialist parties to organise
women from all social layers into a mass movement, win its leadership and convince
women that building socialism is the only path to meeting their special needs. As Lenin
noted in a discussion with Zetkin before the third congress of the International (reprinted
in this collection in Zetkin’s “My Recollections of Lenin”):
The communist women’s movement itself must be a mass movement, a part of the
general mass movements … She who is a communist belongs as a member of the party,
just as he who is a communist … However, we must not shut our eyes to the facts. The
party must have organs — working groups, commissions, committees, sections or
whatever else they may be called — with the specific purpose of rousing the broad
masses of women, bringing them into contact with the party and keeping them under
its influence. This naturally requires that we carry out systematic work among the
women. We must teach the awakening women, win them over for the proletarian class
struggle under the leadership of the Communist Party, and equip them for it. When I

Introduction
say this I have in mind not only proletarian women, whether they work in mills or cook
the family meal. I also have in mind the peasant women and the women of the various
sections of the lower middle class. They too are victims of capitalism … We must have
our own groups to work among them, special methods of agitation, and special forms
of organisation. This is not bourgeois ‘feminism’; it is a practical revolutionary
expediency.

To achieve this, the 1921 congress resolution, reaffirmed in 1922, directed every member
party to organise “special apparatuses” at every level of their party to: “strengthen the
will” of working women by drawing them into all forms and types of struggle; fight the
prejudices against women held by the mass of proletarian men and increase the
awareness of working men and women that they have common interests; educate
women in communist ideas and recruit them to the party; put on the party’s agenda
questions directly concerning the emancipation of women; and conduct a well planned
struggle against the power of tradition, bourgeois customs and religious ideas.
The communist parties were directed to make available whatever resources the
departments needed to do this work, which they characterised as “agitation and
propaganda through action”. This meant:
… above all encouraging working women to self activity, dispelling the doubts they
have about their own abilities and drawing them into practical work … teaching them
through experience to know that every action … directed against the exploitation of
capital, is a step towards improving the position of women.

Concretely, this involved ensuring that women were represented in all organisations
which strengthened revolutionary activity. It also involved intervening in all public
meetings and debates on issues relating to women’s oppression; doing house to house
agitation to reach unemployed women; having special supplements and regular articles
in the party and trade union press on the question; distributing leaflets and pamphlets
on women’s liberation; and making effective use of all educational institutions in the
party.
The Comintern discouraged special courses and schools for women only, but
stressed that all general party schools must “… without fail include a course on the
methods of work among women” and should be attended by representatives chosen
by the women’s department.
Of course, these approaches to doing women’s liberation work were carried out
unevenly by the communist parties, reflecting the unevenness of their Marxist
understanding and development. But the leadership of the International always led,
striving to educate and convince the member parties through discussion and example.
In every case where their orientation was carried out it was proven correct.
On the Emancipation of Women

The Stalinist counter-revolution
Tragically, the Russian revolutionaries’ vision, program, policies and methods of work
for women’s liberation were never fully developed; indeed they were substantially
reversed under the bureaucratic leadership that had, by the late 1920s, wrested power
from the original Bolshevik leadership of the revolution.
Establishing and maintaining working-class political power in a backward, peasantbased economy through the vicissitudes of civil war, foreign intervention and economic
blockade exacted a huge toll on the revolutionaries in Soviet Russia. The decimation of
this layer and the crushing of postwar revolutionary upsurges in more industrialised
countries in Western Europe weakened and demoralised the Soviet working class, and
laid the basis for the usurpation of political power by a bureaucratic caste, headed by
Joseph Stalin.
While the economic foundations of the new workers’ state were not destroyed, a
privileged social layer that appropriated for itself many of the benefits of the new
economic order grew rapidly in the fertile soil of generalised poverty. To protect and
extend its new privileges, the bureaucracy reversed the policies of the Bolsheviks in
virtually every sphere and murdered, exiled or imprisoned almost the entire surviving
Bolshevik leadership. For women, this political counter-revolution led to a policy of
reviving and fortifying the family.
Under Stalin’s policies of forced collectivisation and industrialisation, women poured
into the labour force and by the end of the first five-year plan, the falling birthrate and
growing number of “unsupervised” children provided the ammunition the new
bureaucratic leadership needed to move against the idea that the state should assume
the functions of the family. Official propaganda began instead to glorify the family
system, and measures which bound families together through legal restrictions and
economic compulsion were introduced.
In 1936, the year before the principle author of the Bolsheviks’ 1918 family code
was imprisoned in a mental institution, a new law was drafted and passed with virtually
no opportunity for public discussion that made divorce more difficult, increased
penalties for non payment of alimony, criminalised abortion, instituted a wide range
of pronatalist measures, and recriminalised prostitution and homosexuality.
In 1944, the Family Edict eradicated the last vestiges of the 1926 code, withdrawing
recognition of de facto relationships, banning paternity suits and reintroducing the
category of illegitimacy.
These legal changes were accompanied by a reneging on the provision of socialised
alternatives to domestic labour and a propaganda campaign which simultaneously
exhorted women to participate fully in the effort to increase industrial productivity

Introduction
and appealed to the need for “social stability”, emphasised the importance of individual
family responsibility, and lectured on the joys of motherhood and the happiness of the
worker-mother.
Trotsky explained the process in The Revolution Betrayed:
The triumphal rehabilitation of the family, taking place simultaneously … with the
rehabilitation of the rouble, is caused by the material and cultural bankruptcy of the
state. Instead of openly saying, “we have proven still too poor and ignorant for the
creation of socialist relations among men, our children and grandchildren will realise
this aim”, the leaders are forcing people to glue together again the shell of the broken
family, and not only that, but to consider it, under threat of extreme penalties, the
sacred nucleus of triumphant socialism. It is hard to measure with the eye the scope of
this retreat.

By the 1940s, while Soviet women made up more than half of the waged work force,
the cooking, cleaning, child-care, laundry — all aspects of the maintenance and
reproduction of labour power — fell almost exclusively on their shoulders. The result
was that the overwhelming majority of women became less able to participate in
social, economic and political life, let alone on an equal basis with men.
The Stalinist bureaucracy reinforced the family system for the same reasons it is
maintained by capitalist society — as a means of inculcating attitudes of submission to
authority, perpetuating the division within the working class between man as head of
the household and woman as domestic servant, encouraging the attitude of “each
family for itself”, and minimising the costs of social service provision. All these outcomes
served to reinforce the bureaucracy and maintain its privileges.
In its drive to shore up the family system, the Soviet bureaucracy laid part of the
groundwork for the eventual restoration of capitalism in the Soviet Union from the
1990s. Having entrenched and extended (rather than whittled away) the bourgeois
norms of distribution that are unavoidable in the transition period between capitalism
and socialism, the next step for a self-serving bureaucratic elite was to restore bourgeois
economic relations and thereby transform themselves into a new capitalist class.
Even given the huge step backward that Stalin’s defeat of the Bolsheviks represented
for Soviet women, it was not until the process of restoring capitalism was well under
way that the gains women had made as a by-product of the 1917 revolution’s
socialisation of production became starkly evident.
UNICEF’s “Women in Transition” report, released in October 1999, surveyed a
wide range of social indicators among women and children in 27 former Soviet Union
and Eastern bloc countries. It found that considerably more than half of the 26 million
jobs lost to privatisation between 1989 and 1997 were women’s jobs. In Russia alone,
On the Emancipation of Women

between 1990 and 1995, women lost 7 million jobs while men lost 1 to 2 million. The
report shows that the rate of decline in women’s employment between 1989-97 was
greatest in those countries furthermost along the path of capitalist “reform”. It also
reveals that women’s unemployment rate was directly proportional to the number of
children they had. With a rapidly rising rate of single motherhood and declining
economic security, it is not surprising that maternal and infant mortality rates began to
increase and the number of women in prostitution skyrocketed.

Conclusion
There are enormous lessons to be learnt about the path towards women’s liberation
from both the positive and negative experiences in Soviet history. The progress achieved
by the Bolsheviks, as well as the defeats inflicted on women in terms of their life
conditions and choices during the subsequent counter-revolution, demonstrate the
absolute correctness of Engels’ analysis that because women’s oppression is rooted in
the family as the basic unit of class society, the liberation of women will require not
only their complete re-integration into social production, but also the socialisation of
all of the functions of the family.
Having overthrown capitalist property relations, granted women full legal equality,
begun the process of socialising domestic labour (albeit with major limitations), and
consciously striven to eradicate the backward social attitudes and ideological
justifications for women’s second-class status, the Bolsheviks’ program for women’s
liberation remains the most radical, thorough and successful yet seen. This collection
of writings, which documents the main ideas, debates and experiences in the Bolsheviks’
struggle for the emancipation of women, is therefore essential reading for any serious
socialist and feminist.n

Articles & Speeches by V.I. Lenin
From The Development of Capitalism
in Russia3
VI. Capitalist manufacture & capitalist domestic industry
Further, capitalist domestic industry inevitably entails extremely insanitary working
conditions. The utter poverty of the worker, the utter impossibility of controlling
working conditions by regulations of any kind, and the combination of the living and
working premises, such are the conditions that convert the dwellings of the home
workers into hotbeds of infection and occupational disease. In the large establishments
one can fight such things; domestic industry, however, is in this respect the most
“liberal” form of capitalist exploitation.
An excessively long working day is also an essential feature of domestic work for
the capitalist and of the small industries in general. Instances have been given illustrating
the comparative length of the working day in the “factories” and among the
“handicraftsmen”.
The drawing of women and of children of the tenderest age into production is
nearly always observed in domestic industry. To illustrate this, let us cite some facts
from a description of the women’s industries of Moscow Gubernia. There are 10,004
women engaged in cotton winding; children start work at the age of 5 or 6 (!); daily
earnings are 10 kopeks, yearly 17 rubles. The working day in the women’s industries in
general is as much as 18 hours. In the knitting industry children start work from the age
of six, daily earnings are 10 kopeks, yearly 22 rubles. Altogether 37,514 females are
employed in the women’s industries; they begin working from the age of 5 or 6 (in 6
out of 19 industries, which 6 industries account for 32,400 female workers); the average
Written in 1896-99.
On the Emancipation of Women

daily earnings are 13 kopeks, yearly 26 rubles 20 kopeks.a
One of the most pernicious aspects of capitalist domestic industry is that it leads to
a reduction in the level of the worker’s requirements. The employer is able to recruit
workers in remote districts where the popular standard of living is particularly low and
where the worker’s connection with the land enables him to work for a bare pittance.
For example, the owner of a village stocking establishment explains that in Moscow
rents are high and that, besides, the knitters “have to be … supplied with white bread
… whereas here the workers do the job in their own cottages and eat black bread …
Now how can Moscow compete with us!”b In the cotton-winding industry the
explanation of the very low wages is that for the peasants’ wives, daughters, etc., this is
merely a supplementary source of income. “Thus, the system prevailing in this trade
forces down to the utmost limit the wages of those for whom it is the sole means of
livelihood, reduces the wages of those who obtain their livelihood exclusively by factory
labour below their minimum needs, or retards the raising of their standard of living. In
both cases it creates extremely abnormal conditions.”c “The factory seeks cheap
weavers,” says Mr. Kharizomenov, “and it finds them in their native villages, far from
the centres of industry … That wages drop steadily as one moves from the industrial
centres to the outer regions is an undoubted fact.”d Hence, the employers are perfectly
well able to take advantage of the conditions which artificially tie the population to the
rural districts.

VII. The development of large-scale machine industry
Large-scale machine industry, which concentrates masses of workers who often come
from various parts of the country, absolutely refuses to tolerate survivals of
patriarchalism and personal dependence, and is marked by a truly “contemptuous
attitude to the past”. It is this break with obsolete tradition that is one of the substantial
conditions which have created the possibility and evoked the necessity of regulating
production and of public control over it. In particular, speaking of the transformation
brought about by the factory in the conditions of life of the population, it must be
stated that the drawing of women and juveniles into productiona is, at bottom,
a Mme. Gorbunova, who has described the women’s industries, wrongly gives the earnings as

18 kopeks and 37 rubles 77 kopeks respectively, for she takes only the average figures for each
industry and leaves out of account the different numbers of women working in the different
industries.
b Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VII, Pt. II, p. 104.
c Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VIII, Pt. II, p. 285.
d Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, III, 63. Cf. ibid., 250.

The Development of Capitalism in Russia
progressive. It is indisputable that the capitalist factory places these categories of the
working population in particularly hard conditions, and that for them it is particularly
necessary to regulate and shorten the working day, to guarantee hygienic conditions of
labour, etc.; but endeavours completely to ban the work of women and juveniles in
industry, or to maintain the patriarchal manner of life that ruled out such work, would
be reactionary and utopian. By destroying the patriarchal isolation of these categories
of the population who formerly never emerged from the narrow circle of domestic,
family relationships, by drawing them into direct participation in social production,
large-scale machine industry stimulates their development and increases their
independence, in other words, creates conditions of life that are incomparably superior
to the patriarchal immobility of precapitalist relations.bn

a According to the Directory, the factories of European Russia in 1890 employed a total of

875,764 workers, of whom 210,207 (24%) were women, 17,793 (2%) boys, and 8216 (1%) girls.
b “The poor woman-weaver follows her father and husband to the factory and works alongside
of them and independently of them. She is as much a breadwinner as the man is.” “In the
factory … the woman is quite an independent producer, apart from her husband.” Literacy
spreads among the women factory workers with remarkable rapidity. (Industries of Vladimir
Gubernia, III, 113, 118, 112 and elsewhere.) Mr. Kharizomenov is perfectly right in drawing the
following conclusion: industry has destroyed “the economic dependence of the woman on the
family … and on the husband … At the factory, the woman is the equal of the man; this is the
equality of the proletarian … The capitalisation of industry is an important factor in the
woman’s struggle for her independence in the family.” “Industry creates a new position for the
woman in which she is completely independent of her family and husband.” (Yuridichesky
Vestnik, 1883, No. 12, pp. 582, 596.) In the Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia (Vol. VII,
Pt. 11, Moscow, 1882, pp. 152, 138-39), the investigators compare the position of women
engaged in making stockings by hand and by machine. The daily earnings of hand workers is
about 8 kopeks, and of machine workers, 14 to 30 kopeks. The working woman’s conditions
under machine production are described as follows: “… Before us is a free young woman,
hampered by no obstacles, emancipated from the family and from all that constitutes the
peasant woman’s conditions of life, a young woman who at any moment may leave one place
for another, one employer for another, and may at any moment find herself without a job …
without a crust of bread … Under hand production, the knitter’s earnings are very meagre,
insufficient to cover the cost of her food, earnings only acceptable if she, as a member of an
allotment-holding and farming family, enjoys in part the product of that land; under machine
production the working woman, in addition to food and tea, gets earnings which enable … her
to live away from the family and to do without the family’s income from the land … Moreover,
the woman worker’s earnings in machine industry, under present conditions, are more secure.”
On the Emancipation of Women

V.I Lenin (1870-1924)

From The Draft Program of the Russian
Social-Democratic Labour Party
[B]
XIII. The tsarist autocracy is the most outstanding of these remnants of the serfowning system and the most formidable bulwark of all this barbarism. It is the bitterest
and most dangerous enemy of the proletarian emancipation movement and the
cultural development of the entire people.
[C]
For these reasonsa the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party advances as its
immediate political task the overthrow of the tsarist autocracy and its replacement by
a republic based on a democratic constitution that would ensure:
1. The people’s sovereignty, i.e., concentration of supreme state power in the
hands of a legislative assembly consisting of representatives of the people;
2. Universal, equal, and direct suffrage, both in elections to the legislative assembly
and in elections to all local organs of self-government, for every citizen who has reached
the age of 21; the secret ballot at all elections; the right of every voter to be elected to
any of the representative assemblies; remuneration for representatives of the people;
3. Inviolability of the person and domicile of citizens;
4. Unrestricted freedom of conscience, speech, the press and of assembly, the right
to strike and to organise unions;
5. Freedom of movement and occupation;
6. Abolition of social-estates; full equality for all citizens, irrespective of sex, religion
or race;
7. Recognition of the right to self-determination for all nations forming part of the
Written in January-February 1902; published in Iskra No. 21, June 1, 1902.
a The theoretical part (sections A and B) of the draft program was put forward by Lenin
(pseudonym Frey). The practical part (section C) was put forward by the whole Iskra drafting
committee. — Ed.
On the Emancipation of Women

state;
8. The right of every citizen to prosecute any official, without previously complaining
to the latter’s superiors;
9. General arming of the people instead of maintaining a standing army;
10. Separation of the church from the state and of the school from the church;
11. Universal, free, and compulsory education up to the age of 16; state provision
of food, clothing, and school supplies to needy children.
[D]
To protect the working class and to raise its fighting capacity,a the Russian SocialDemocratic Labour Party demands:
1. That the working day be limited to eight hours for all wage-workers;
2. That a weekly rest period of not less than 36 consecutive hours for wage-workers
of both sexes employed in all branches of the national economy be established by law;
3. That all overtime be prohibited;
4. That night-work (from 9pm to 5am) in all branches of the national economy be
prohibited, with the exception of those branches in which it is essential for technical
reasons;
5. That employers be forbidden to employ children under the age of 15;
6. That female labour be forbidden in industries specifically injurious to the health
of women;
7. That the law establish employers’ civil liability for workers’ complete or partial
disability caused by accidents or by harmful working conditions; that the worker should
not be required to prove his employer’s responsibility for disability;
8. That payment of wages in kind be prohibited;b
9. That state pensions be paid to aged workers, who have become incapacitated;
10. That the number of factory inspectors be increased; that female inspectors be
appointed in industries in which female labour predominates; that observance of the
factory laws be supervised by representatives elected by the workers and paid by the
state; piece rates and rejection of work done should also be supervised by elected
representatives of the workers;
11. That local self-government bodies, in cooperation with elected representatives
of the workers, supervise sanitary conditions in living quarters provided for workers
a Frey moved that the beginning of this paragraph be altered to read as follows: “To safeguard

the working class from physical and moral degeneration, and also to raise its fighting capacity
in the struggle for its emancipation …”
b Frey moved that the following be inserted here (in the same clause): “that the law should
establish weekly payment for all workers employed on a contract basis.”

The Draft Program of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party
by employers, and also see to the observance of rules operating in such living quarters
and the terms on which they are leased, with the object of protecting the wage-workers
from employers’ interference in their lives and activities as private persons and citizens;
12. That a properly organised and comprehensive system of sanitary inspection be
instituted to supervise working conditions at all enterprises employing wage-labour;
13. That the Factory Inspectorate’s activities be extended to artisan, home, and
handicraft industries, and to state-owned enterprises;
14. That any breach of the labour protection laws be punishable by law;
15. That employers be forbidden to make any deductions from wages, on any
grounds or for any purpose whatsoever (fines, rejections, etc.);
16. That factory courts5 be set up in all branches of the national economy, with
equal representation of workers and employers.n
On the Emancipation of Women

From The International Socialist
Congress in Stuttgart
The resolution on women’s suffrage was also adopted unanimously. Only one
Englishwoman from the semibourgeois Fabian Society defended the admissibility of a
struggle not for full women’s suffrage but for one limited to those possessing property.
The congress rejected this unconditionally and declared in favour of women workers
campaigning for the franchise, not in conjunction with the bourgeois supporters of
women’s rights, but in conjunction with the class parties of the proletariat. The congress
recognised that in the campaign for women’s suffrage it was necessary to uphold fully
the principles of socialism and equal rights for men and women without distorting
those principles for the sake of expediency.
In this connection an interesting difference of opinion arose in the commission.
The Austrians (Viktor Adler, Adelheid Popp) justified their tactics in the struggle for
universal manhood suffrage: for the sake of winning this suffrage, they thought it
expedient in the campaign not to put the demand for women’s suffrage, too, in the
foreground. The German social-democrats, and especially Clara Zetkin, had protested
against this when the Austrians were campaigning for universal suffrage. Zetkin declared
in the press that they should not under any circumstances have neglected the demand
for women’s suffrage, that the Austrians had opportunistically sacrificed principle to
expediency, and that they would not have narrowed the scope of their agitation, but
would have widened it and increased the force of the popular movement had they
fought for women’s suffrage with the same energy. In the commission Zetkin was
supported wholeheartedly by another prominent German woman social-democrat,
Zietz. Adler’s amendment, which indirectly justified the Austrian tactics, was rejected
by 12 votes to 9 (this amendment stated only that there should be no abatement of the
struggle for a suffrage that would really extend to all citizens, instead of stating that the
struggle for the suffrage should always include the demand for equal rights for men
Written in September 1907.

The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart
and women). The point of view of the commission and of the congress may be most
accurately expressed in the following words of the above-mentioned Zietz in her
speech at the International Socialist Women’s Conference (this conference took place
in Stuttgart at the same time as the congress):
“In principle we must demand all that we consider to be correct”, said Zietz, “and
only when our strength is inadequate for more, do we accept what we are able to get.
That has always been the tactics of social-democracy. The more modest our demands
the more modest will the government be in its concessions …” This controversy
between the Austrian and German women social-democrats will enable the reader to
see how severely the best Marxists treat the slightest deviation from the principles of
consistent revolutionary tactics.n
On the Emancipation of Women

Civilised Europeans & Savage Asians
The well-known English social-democrat, Rothstein, relates in the German labour
press an instructive and typical incident that occurred in British India. This incident
reveals better than all arguments why the revolution is growing apace in that country
with its more than 300 million inhabitants.
Arnold, a British journalist, who brings out a newspaper in Rangoon, a large town
(with over 200,000 inhabitants) in one of the Indian provinces, published an article
entitled: “A Mockery of British Justice.” It exposed a local British judge named Andrew.
For publishing this article Arnold was sentenced to 12 months’ imprisonment, but he
appealed and, having connections in London, was able to get the case before the
highest court in Britain. The government of India hastily “reduced” the sentence to
four months and Arnold was released.
What was all the fuss about?
A British colonel named McCormick had a mistress whose servant was an 11year-old Indian girl, named Aina. This gallant representative of a civilised nation enticed
Aina to his room, raped her and locked her up in his house.
It so happened that Aina’s father was dying and he sent for his daughter. It was
then that the village where he lived learned the whole story. The population seethed
with indignation. The police were compelled to order McCormick’s arrest.
But Judge Andrew released him on bail, and later acquitted him, following a
disgraceful travesty of justice. The gallant colonel declared, as gentlemen of noble
extraction usually do under such circumstances, that Aina was a prostitute, in proof of
which he brought five witnesses. Eight witnesses, however, brought by Aina’s mother
were not even examined by Judge Andrew.
When the journalist Arnold was tried for libel, the President of the Court, Sir (“His
Worship”) Charles Fox, refused to allow him to call witnesses in his defence.
It must be clear to everyone that thousands and millions of such cases occur in
India. Only absolutely exceptional circumstances enabled the “libeller” Arnold (the
First published in Pravda, April 14, 1913.

Civilised Europeans & Savage Asians
son of an influential London journalist) to get out of prison and secure publicity for the
case.
Do not forget that the British Liberals put their “best” people at the head of the
Indian administration. Not long ago the Viceroy of India, the chief of the McCormicks,
Andrews and Foxes, was John Morley, the well-known radical author, a “luminary of
European learning”, a “most honourable man” in the eyes of all European and Russian
liberals.
The “European” spirit has already awakened in Asia, the peoples of Asia have
become democratic-minded.n
On the Emancipation of Women

A Great Technical Achievement
The world-famous British chemist, William Ramsay, has discovered a method of
obtaining gas directly from a coal seam. Ramsay is already negotiating with a colliery
owner on the practical application of this method.
A great modern technical problem is thus approaching solution. The revolution
that will be effected by this solution will be a tremendous one.
At the present time, to utilise the energy contained in it, coal is transported all over
the country and burned in numerous factories and homes.
Ramsay’s discovery means a gigantic technical revolution in this, perhaps the most
important, branch of production in capitalist countries.
Ramsay has discovered a method of transforming coal into gas right where the
coal lies, without hauling it to the surface. A similar but much simpler method is
sometimes used in the mining of salt: it is not brought to the surface directly, but is
dissolved in water, the solution being pumped to the top.
Ramsay’s method is to transform, as it were, the coal mines into enormous distilling
apparatuses for the production of gas. Gas is used to drive gas engines which extract
twice as much energy from coal as steam engines can. Gas engines, in their turn,
transform the energy into electricity, which modern technology can already transmit
over enormous distances.
Such a technical revolution would reduce the cost of electricity to one-fifth or even
one-tenth of its present price. An enormous amount of human labour now spent in
extracting and distributing coal would be saved. It would be possible to use even the
poorest seams, now not being worked. The cost of lighting and heating houses would
be greatly reduced.
This discovery will bring about an enormous revolution in industry.
But the consequences this revolution will have for social life as a whole under the
present capitalist system will be quite different from those the discovery would yield
under socialism.
First published in Pravda, April 21, 1913.

A Great Technical Achievement
Under capitalism the “release” of the labour of millions of miners engaged in
extracting coal will inevitably cause mass unemployment, an enormous increase in
poverty, and a worsening of the workers’ conditions. And the profits of this great
invention will be pocketed by the Morgans, Rockefellers, Ryabushinskys, Morozovs,
and their suites of lawyers, directors, professors, and other flunkeys of capital.
Under socialism the application of Ramsay’s method, which will “release” the
labour of millions of miners, etc., will make it possible immediately to shorten the
working day for all from eight hours to, say, seven hours and even less. The
“electrification” of all factories and railways will make working conditions more hygienic,
will free millions of workers from smoke, dust and dirt, and accelerate the
transformation of dirty, repulsive workshops into clean, bright laboratories worthy of
human beings. The electric lighting and heating of every home will relieve millions of
“domestic slaves” of the need to spend three-fourths of their lives in smelly kitchens.
Capitalist technology is increasingly, day by day, outgrowing the social conditions
which condemn the working people to wage-slavery.n
On the Emancipation of Women

Capitalism & Female Labour
Present-day capitalist society conceals within itself numerous cases of poverty and
oppression which do not immediately strike the eye. At the best of times, the scattered
families of poor townspeople, artisans, workers, employees and petty officials live in
incredible difficulties, barely managing to make both ends meet. Millions upon millions
of women in such families live (or, rather, exist) as “domestic slaves”, striving to feed
and clothe their family on pennies, at the cost of desperate daily effort and “saving” on
everything — except their own labour.
It is these women that the capitalists most willingly employ as home-workers, who
are prepared for a monstrously low wage to “earn a little extra” for themselves and
their family, for the sake of a crust of bread. It is from among these, women, too, that
the capitalists of all countries recruit for themselves (like the ancient slave-owners and
the medieval feudal lords) any number of concubines at a most “reasonable” price.
And no amount of “moral indignation” (hypocritical in 99 cases out of 100) about
prostitution can do anything against this trade in female flesh; so long as wage-slavery
exists, inevitably prostitution too will exist. All the oppressed and exploited classes
throughout the history of human societies have always been forced (and it is in this
that their exploitation consists) to give up to their oppressors, first, their unpaid labour
and, second, their women as concubines for the “masters”.
Slavery, feudalism and capitalism are identical in this respect. It is only the form of
exploitation that changes; the exploitation itself remains.
An exhibition of the work of “women exploited at home” has opened in Paris, the
“capital of the world”, and the centre of civilisation.
Each exhibit has a little tag showing how much the woman working at home
receives for making it, and how much she can make per day and per hour on this basis.
And what do we find? Not on a single article can a woman working at home earn
more than 1.25 francs, i.e., 50 kopeks, whereas the earnings on the vast majority of jobs
are very much smaller. Take lampshades. The pay is 4 kopeks per dozen. Or paper
Written in May 1913.

Capitalism & Female Labour
bags: 15 kopeks per thousand, with earnings at six kopeks an hour. Here are little toys
with ribbons, etc.: 2.5 kopeks an hour. Artificial flowers: two or three kopeks an hour.
Ladies’ and gentlemen’s underwear: from two to six kopeks an hour. And so on,
without end.
Our workers’ associations and trade unions, too, ought to organise an “exhibition”
of this kind. It will not yield the colossal profits brought in by the exhibitions of the
bourgeoisie. A display of proletarian women’s poverty and indigence will bring a
different benefit: it will help wage-slaves, both men and women, to understand their
condition, look back over their “life”, ponder the conditions for emancipation from
this perpetual yoke of want, poverty, prostitution and every kind of outrage against
the have-nots.n
On the Emancipation of Women

The Working Class &
Neomalthusianism
At the Pirogov Doctors’ Congress11 much interest was aroused and a long debate was
held on the question of abortions. The report was made by Lichkus, who quoted
figures on the exceedingly widespread practice of destroying the foetus in present-day
so-called civilised states.
In New York, 80,000 abortions were performed in one year and there are 36,000
every month in France. In St. Petersburg the percentage of abortions has more than
doubled in five years.
The Pirogov Doctors’ Congress adopted a resolution saying that there should
never be any criminal prosecution of a mother for performing an artificial abortion
and that doctors should only be prosecuted if the operation is performed for “purposes
of gain”.
In the discussion the majority agreed that abortions should not be punishable, and
the question of the so-called neomalthusianism (the use of contraceptives) was naturally
touched upon, as was also the social side of the matter. Mr. Vigdorchik, for instance,
said, according to the report in Russkoye Slovo,12 that “contraceptive measures should
be welcomed” and Mr. Astrakhan exclaimed, amidst thunderous applause:
We have to convince mothers to bear children so that they can be maimed in educational
establishments, so that lots can be drawn for them, so that they can be driven to suicide!

If the report is true that this exclamation of Mr. Astrakhan’s was greeted with
thunderous applause, it is a fact that does not surprise me. The audience was made up
of bourgeois, middle and petty bourgeois, who have the psychology of the philistine.
What can you expect from them but the most banal liberalism?
From the point of view of the working class, however, it would hardly be possible
to find a more apposite expression of the completely reactionary nature and the
ugliness of “social neomalthusianism” than Mr. Astrakhan’s phrase cited above.
First published in Pravda, June 16, 1913.

The Working Class & Neomalthusianism
… “Bear children so that they can be maimed …” For that alone? Why not that
they should fight better, more unitedly, consciously and resolutely than we are fighting
against the present-day conditions of life that are maiming and ruining our generation?
This is the radical difference that distinguishes the psychology of the peasant,
handicraftsman, intellectual, the petty bourgeois in general, from that of the proletarian.
The petty bourgeois sees and feels that he is heading for ruin, that life is becoming
more difficult, that the struggle for existence is ever more ruthless, and that his position
and that of his family are becoming more and more hopeless. It is an indisputable fact,
and the petty bourgeois protests against it.
But how does he protest?
He protests as the representative of a class that is hopelessly perishing, that despairs
of its future, that is depressed and cowardly. There is nothing to be done … if only
there were fewer children to suffer our torments and hard toil, our poverty and our
humiliation — such is the cry of the petty bourgeois.
The class-conscious worker is far from holding this point of view. He will not allow
his consciousness to be dulled by such cries no matter how sincere and heartfelt they
may be. Yes, we workers and the mass of small proprietors lead a life that is filled with
unbearable oppression and suffering. Things are harder for our generation than they
were for our fathers. But in one respect we are luckier than our fathers. We have begun
to learn and are rapidly learning to fight — and to fight not as individuals, as the best of
our fathers fought, not for the slogans of bourgeois speechifiers that are alien to us in
spirit, but for our slogans, the slogans of our class. We are fighting better than our
fathers did. Our children will fight better than we do — and they will be victorious.
The working class is not perishing, it is growing, becoming stronger, gaining courage,
consolidating itself, educating itself and becoming steeled in battle. We are pessimists
as far as serfdom, capitalism and petty production are concerned, but we are ardent
optimists in what concerns the working-class movement and its aims. We are already
laying the foundation of a new edifice and our children will complete its construction.
That is the reason — the only reason — why we are unconditionally the enemies of
neomalthusianism, suited only to unfeeling and egotistic petty-bourgeois couples,
who whisper in scared voices: “God grant we manage somehow by ourselves. So much
the better if we have no children.”
It goes without saying that this does not by any means prevent us from demanding
the unconditional annulment of all laws against abortions or against the distribution of
medical literature on contraceptive measures, etc. Such laws are nothing but the
hypocrisy of the ruling classes. These laws do not heal the ulcers of capitalism, they
merely turn them into malignant ulcers that are especially painful for the oppressed
On the Emancipation of Women

masses. Freedom for medical propaganda and the protection of the elementary
democratic rights of citizens, men and women, are one thing. The social theory of
neomalthusiansim is quite another. Class-conscious workers will always conduct the
most ruthless struggle against attempts to impose that reactionary and cowardly theory
on the most progressive and strongest class in modern society, the class that is the best
prepared for great changes.n

Fifth International Congress Against
Prostitution
The fifth international congress for the suppression of the white slave traffic recently
ended in London.
Duchesses, countesses, bishops, priests, rabbis, police officials and all sorts of
bourgeois philanthropists were well to the fore! How many festive luncheons and
magnificent official receptions were given! And how many solemn speeches on the
harm and infamy of prostitution!
What means of struggle were proposed by the elegant bourgeois delegates to the
congress? Mainly two methods — religion and police. They are, it appears, the most
valid and reliable methods of combating prostitution. One English delegate boasted,
according to the London correspondent of the Leipziger Volkszeitung,14 that he had
introduced a bill into parliament providing for corporal punishment for pimps. See the
sort he is, this modern “civilised” hero of the struggle against prostitution!
One lady from Canada waxed enthusiastic over the police and the supervision of
“fallen” women by policewomen, but as far as raising wages was concerned, she said
that women workers did not deserve better pay.
One German pastor reviled present-day materialism, which, he said, is taking hold
among the people and promoting the spread of free love.
When the Austrian delegate Gärtner tried to raise the question of the social causes
of prostitution, of the need and poverty experienced by working-class families, of the
exploitation of child labour, of unbearable housing conditions, etc., he was forced to
silence by hostile shouts!
But the things that were said about highly-placed personages — among groups of
delegates — were instructive and sublime. When, for example, the German Empress
visits a maternity hospital in Berlin, rings are placed on the fingers of mothers of
“illegitimate” children in order that this august individual may not be shocked by the
First published in Rabochaya Pravda, July 13, 1913.
On the Emancipation of Women

sight of unmarried mothers!
We may judge from this of the disgusting bourgeois hypocrisy that reigns at
these aristocratic-bourgeois congresses. Acrobats in the field of philanthropy
and police defenders of this mockery of poverty and need gather “to struggle
against prostitution”, which is supported precisely by the aristocracy and the
bourgeoisie …n

Petty Production in Agriculture
The peasant question in modern capitalist states most frequently gives rise to perplexity
and vacillation among Marxists and to most of the attacks on Marxism by bourgeois
(professorial) political economy.
Petty production in agriculture is doomed to extinction and to an incredibly abased
and downtrodden position under capitalism, say the Marxists. Petty production is
dependent on big capital, is backward in comparison with large-scale production in
agriculture, and can only keep going by means of desperately reduced consumption
and laborious, arduous toil. The frittering away and waste of human labour, the worst
forms of dependence of the producer, exhaustion of the peasant’s family, his cattle
and his land — this is what capitalism everywhere brings the peasant.
There is no salvation for the peasant except by joining in the activities of the
proletariat, primarily those of the wage-workers.
Bourgeois political economy, and the Narodniks and opportunists who champion
it (though they may not always be conscious of the fact), on the contrary, try to prove
that petty production is viable and is more profitable than large-scale production. The
peasant, who has a firm and assured position in capitalist society, must gravitate, not
towards the proletariat, but towards the bourgeoisie; he must not gravitate towards
the class struggle of the wage-workers but must try to strengthen his position as a
proprietor and master — such, in substance, is the theory of the bourgeois economists.
We will try to test the soundness of the proletarian and bourgeois theories by
means of precise data. Let us take the data on female labour in agriculture in Austria
and Germany. Full data for Russia are still lacking because the government is unwilling
to take a scientifically based census of all agricultural enterprises.
In Austria, according to the census of 1902, out of 9,070,682 persons employed in
agriculture 4,422,981, or 48.7%, were women. In Germany, where capitalism is far
more developed, women constitute the majority of those employed in agriculture —
54.8%. The more capitalism develops in agriculture the more it employs female labour,
First published in Rabochaya Pravda, July 18, 1913.
On the Emancipation of Women

that is to say, worsens the living conditions of the working masses. Women employed
in German industry make up 25% of the total labour force, but in agriculture they
constitute more than 50%. This shows that industry is absorbing the best labour and
leaving the weaker to agriculture.
In developed capitalist countries agriculture has already become mainly a women’s
occupation.
But if we examine statistics on farms of various sizes we shall see that it is in petty
production that the exploitation of female labour assumes particularly large
proportions. On the other hand, even in agriculture, large-scale capitalist production
employs mainly male labour, although in this respect it has not caught up with industry.
The following are the comparative figures for Austria and Germany:
Type of farm

Group according to size of farm

Proletarian

Up to half a hectarea
1/2 to 2 hectares
2 to 5
5 to 10
10 to 20
20 to 100
100 hectares and over

Peasant

Capitalist
For all farms

% women employed
Austria
Germany
52.0
74.1
50.9
65.7
49.6
54.4
48.5
50.2
48.6
48.4
46.6
44.8
27.4
41.0
48.7
54.8

In both countries we see the operation of the same law of capitalist agriculture. The
smaller the scale of production the poorer is the composition of the labour force, and
the greater the number of women among the total number of persons employed in
agriculture.
The general situation under capitalism is the following. On proletarian farms, i.e.,
those whose “proprietors” live mainly by means of wage-labour (agricultural labourers,
day-labourers, and wage-workers in general who possess a tiny plot of land), female
labour predominates over male labour, sometimes to an enormous extent.
It must not be forgotten that the number of these proletarian or labourer farms is
enormous: in Austria they amount to 1,300,000 out of a total of 2,800,000 farms, and in
Germany there are even 3,400,000 out of a total of 5,700,000.
On peasant farms male and female labour is employed in nearly equal proportions.
Finally, on capitalist farms, male labour predominates over female labour.
a One hectare=0.9 of a dessiatine, or 3.28 acres — Ed.

Petty Production in Agriculture
What does this signify?
It signifies that the composition of the labour force in petty production is inferior
to that in large-scale capitalist production.
It signifies that in agriculture the working woman — the proletarian woman and
peasant woman — must exert herself ever so much more, must strain herself to the
utmost, must toil at her work to the detriment of her health and the health of her
children, in order to keep up as far as possible with the male worker in large-scale
capitalist production.
It signifies that petty production keeps going under capitalism only by squeezing
out of the worker a larger amount of work than is squeezed out of the worker in largescale production.
The peasant is more tied up, more entangled in the complicated net of capitalist
dependence than the wage-worker. He thinks he is independent, that he can “make
good”; but as a matter of fact, in order to keep going, he must work (for capital) harder
than the wage-worker.
The figures on child labour in agriculture prove this still more clearly.n
On the Emancipation of Women

To Inessa Armand (1)
Dear Friend,
I very much advise you to write the plan of the pamphlet17 in as much detail as
possible. Otherwise too much is unclear.
One opinion I must express here and now:
I advise you to throw out altogether §3 — the “demand (women’s) for freedom of
love”.
That is not really a proletarian but a bourgeois demand.
After all, what do you understand by that phrase? What can be understood by it?
1. Freedom from material (financial) calculations in affairs of love?
2. The same, from material worries?
3. From religious prejudices?
4. From prohibitions by Papa, etc.?
5. From the prejudices of “society”?
6. From the narrow circumstances of one’s environment (peasant or pettybourgeois or bourgeois intellectual)?
7. From the fetters of the law, the courts and the police?
8. From the serious element in love?
9. From childbirth?
10. Freedom of adultery? Etc,
I have enumerated many shades (not all, of course). You have in mind, of course, not
nos. 8-10, but either nos. 1-7 or something similar to nos. 1-7.
But then for nos. 1-7 you must choose a different wording, because freedom of
love does not express this idea exactly.
And the public, the readers of the pamphlet, will inevitably understand by “freedom
of love”, in general, something like nos. 8-10, even without your wishing it.
Just because in modern society the most talkative, noisy and “top-prominent”
classes understand by “freedom of love” nos. 8-10, just for that very reason this is not
Written January 17, 1915 in Berne.

To Inessa Armand (1)
a proletarian but a bourgeois demand.
For the proletariat nos. 1-2 are the most important, and then nos. 1-7, and those,
in fact, are not “freedom of love”.
The thing is not what you subjectively “mean” by this. The thing is the objective logic
of class relations in affairs of love.
Friendly shake hands!a
WI

a The beginning and ending of the letter were written by Lenin in English. — Ed.
On the Emancipation of Women

To Inessa Armand (2)
Dear Friend,
I apologise,for my delay in replying: I wanted to do it yesterday, but was prevented,
and I had no time to sit down and write.
As regards your plan for the pamphlet, my opinion was that “the demand for
freedom of love” was unclear and — independently of your will and your wish (I
emphasised this when I said that what mattered was the objective, class relations, and
not your subjective wishes) — would, in present social conditions, turn out to be a
bourgeois, not a proletarian demand.
You do not agree.
Very well. Let us look at the thing again.
In order to make the unclear clear, I enumerated approximately 10 possible (and, in
conditions of class discord, inevitable) different interpretations, and in doing so
remarked that interpretations 1-7, in my opinion, would be typical or characteristic of
proletarian women, and 8-10 of bourgeois women.
If you are to refute this, you have to show (1) that these interpretations are wrong
(and then replace them by others, or indicate which are wrong), or (2) incomplete
(then you should add those which are missing), or (3) are not divided into proletarian
and bourgeois in that way.
You don’t do either one, or the other, or the third.
You don’t touch on points 1-7 at all. Does this mean that you admit them to be
true (on the whole)? (What you write about the prostitution of proletarian women
and their dependence: “impossibility of saying no” fully comes under points 1-7. No
difference at all can be detected between us here.)
Nor do you deny that this is a proletarian interpretation.
There remain points 8-10.
These you “don’t quite understand” and “object” to: “I don’t understand how it is
possible” (that is what you have written!) “to identify” (!!??) “freedom of love with”
Written January 24, 1915 in Berne.

To Inessa Armand (2)
point 10 …
So it appears that I am “identifying”, while you have undertaken to refute and
demolish me?
How so?
Bourgeois women understand by freedom of love points 8-10 — that is my thesis.
Do you deny this? Will you say what bourgeois ladies understand by freedom of
love?
You don’t say that. Do not literature and life really prove that that is just how
bourgeois women understand They prove it completely! You tacitly admit this.
And if that is so, the point is their class position, and it is hardly possible and almost
naïve to “refute” them.
What you must do is separate from them clearly, contrast with them, the proletarian
point of view. One must take into account the objective fact that otherwise they will
snatch the appropriate passages from your pamphlet, interpret them in their own
way, make your pamphlet into water pouring on their mill, distort your ideas in the
workers’ eyes, “confuse” the workers (sowing in their minds the fear that you may be
bringing them alien ideas). And in their hands are a host of newspapers, etc.
While you, completely forgetting the objective and class point of view, go over to
the “offensive” against me, as though I am “identifying” freedom of love with points 810 … Marvellous, really marvellous …
“Even a fleeting passion and intimacy” are “more poetic and cleaner” than “kisses
without love” of a (vulgar and shallow) married couple. That is what you write. And
that is what you intend to write in your pamphlet. Very good. Is the contrast logical?
Kisses without love between a vulgar couple are dirty. I agree. To them one should
contrast … what? … One would think: kisses with love? While you contrast them with
“fleeting” (why fleeting?) “passion” (why not love?) — so, logically, it turns out that
kisses without love (fleeting) are contrasted with kisses without love by married people
… Strange. For a popular pamphlet, would it not be better to contrast philistineintellectual-peasant (I think they’re in my point 6 or point 5) vulgar and dirty marriage
without love to proletarian civil marriage with love (adding, if you absolutely insist, that
fleeting intimacy and passion, too, may be dirty and may be clean). What you have
arrived at is, not the contrast of class types, but something like an “incident”, which of
course is possible. But is it a question of particular incidents? If you take the theme of
an incident, an individual case of dirty kisses in marriage and pure ones in a fleeting
intimacy, that is a theme to be worked out in a novel (because there the whole essence
is in the individual circumstances, the analysis of the characters and psychology of
particular types). But in a pamphlet?
On the Emancipation of Women

You understood my idea very well about the unsuitable quotation from Key,
when you said it is “stupid” to appear in the role of “professors of love”. Quite so. Well,
and what about the role of professors of fleeting, etc.?
Really, I don’t want to engage in polemics at all. I would willingly throw aside this
letter and postpone matters until we can talk about it. But I want the pamphlet to be a
good one, so that no one could tear out of it phrases which would cause you
unpleasantness (sometimes one single phrase is enough to be the spoonful of tar in a
barrel of honey), could misinterpret you. I am sure that here, too, you wrote “without
wishing it”, and the only reason why I am sending you this letter is that you may
examine the plan in greater detail as a result of the letters than you would after a talk
— and the plan, you know, is a very important thing.
Have you not some French socialist friend? Translate my points 1-10 to her (as
though it were from English), together with your remarks about “fleeting”, etc., and
watch her, listen to her as attentively as possible: a little experiment as to what outside
people will say, what their impressions will be, what they will expect of the pamphlet.
I shake you by the hand, and wish you fewer headaches and to get better soon.
VU
PS […]

From A Caricature of Marxism &
Imperialist Economism
P. Kievsky does not understand the difference between “negative” slogans that stigmatise
political evils and economic evils. The difference lies in the fact that certain economic
evils are part of capitalism as such, whatever the political superstructure, and that it is
impossible to eliminate them economically without eliminating capitalism itself. Not a
single instance can be cited to disprove this. On the other hand, political evils represent
a departure from democracy which, economically, is fully possible “on the basis of the
existing system”, i.e., capitalism, and by way of exception is being implemented under
capitalism — certain aspects in one country, other aspects in another. Again, what the
author fails to understand is precisely the fundamental conditions necessary for the
implementation of democracy in general!
The same applies to the question of divorce. The reader will recall that it was first
posed by Rosa Luxemburg in the discussion on the national question. She expressed
the perfectly justified opinion that if we uphold autonomy within a state (for a definite
region, area, etc.) we must, as centralist social-democrats, insist that all major national
issues — and divorce legislation is one of them — should come within the jurisdiction
of the central government and central parliament. This example clearly demonstrates
that one cannot be a democrat and socialist without demanding full freedom of divorce
now, because the lack of such freedom is additional oppression of the oppressed sex
— though it should not be difficult to realise that recognition of the freedom to leave
one’s husband is not an invitation to all wives to do so!
P. Kievsky “objects”:
“What would this right [of divorce] be like if in such cases (when the wife wants to
leave the husband) she could not exercise her right? Or if its exercise depended on the
will of third parties, or, worse still, on the will of claimants to her affections? Would we
advocate the proclamation of such a right? Of course not!”
Written August-October 1916.
On the Emancipation of Women

That objection reveals complete failure to understand the relation between
democracy in general and capitalism. The conditions that make it impossible for the
oppressed classes to “exercise” their democratic rights are not the exception under
capitalism; they are typical of the system. In most cases the right of divorce will remain
unrealisable under capitalism, for the oppressed sex is subjugated economically. No
matter how much democracy there is under capitalism, the woman remains a “domestic
slave”, a slave locked up in the bedroom, nursery, kitchen. The right to elect their
“own” people’s judges, officials, schoolteachers, jurymen, etc., is likewise in most cases
unrealisable under capitalism precisely because of the economic subjection of the
workers and peasants. The same applies to the democratic republic: our program
defines it as “government by the people”, though all social-democrats know perfectly
well that under capitalism, even in the most democratic republic there is bound to be
bribery of officials by the bourgeoisie and an alliance of stock exchange and the
government.
Only those who cannot think straight or have no knowledge of Marxism will
conclude: so there is no point in having a republic, no point in freedom of divorce, no
point in democracy, no point in self-determination of nations! But Marxists know that
democracy does not abolish class oppression. It only makes the class struggle more
direct, wider, more open and pronounced, and that is what we need. The fuller the
freedom of divorce, the clearer will women see that the source of their “domestic
slavery” is capitalism, not lack of rights. The more democratic the system of government,
the clearer will the workers see that the root evil is capitalism, not lack of rights. The
fuller national equality (and it is not complete without freedom of secession), the
clearer will the workers of the oppressed nations see that the cause of their oppression
is capitalism, not lack of rights, etc.
It must be said again and again: It is embarrassing to have to drive home the ABC
of Marxism, but what is one to do if Kievsky does not know it?
He discusses divorce in much the same way as one of the secretaries of the Organising
Committee20 abroad, Semkovsky, discussed it, if I remember rightly, in the Paris Golos.21
His line of reasoning was that freedom of divorce is not, it is true, an invitation to all
wives to leave their husbands, but if it is proved that all other husbands are better than
yours, madame, then it amounts to one and the same thing!!
In taking that line of argument Semkovsky forgot that crank thinking is not a
violation of socialist or democratic principles. If Semkovsky were to tell a woman that
all other husbands are better than hers, no one would regard this as violation of
democratic principles. At most people would say: There are bound to be big cranks in
a big party! But if Semkovsky were to take it into his head to defend as a democrat a

A Caricature of Marxism & Imperialist Economism
person who opposed freedom of divorce and appealed, for instance, to the courts, the
police or the church to prevent his wife leaving him, we feel sure that even most of
Semkovsky’s colleagues on the Secretariat Abroad, though they are sorry socialists,
would refuse to support him!
Both Semkovsky and Kievsky, in their “discussion” of divorce, fail to understand
the issue and avoid its substance, namely, that under capitalism the right of divorce, as
all other democratic rights without exception, is conditional, restricted, formal, narrow
and extremely difficult of realisation. Yet no self-respecting social-democrat will
consider anyone opposing the right of divorce a democrat, let alone a socialist. That is
the crux of the matter. All “democracy” consists in the proclamation and realisation of
“rights” which under capitalism are realisable only to very small degree and only
relatively. But without the proclamation of these rights, without a struggle to introduce
them now, immediately, without training the masses in the spirit of this struggle,
socialism is impossible.n
On the Emancipation of Women

From Tasks of the Left Zimmerwaldists
in the Swiss Social-Democratic Party
III. Pressing Democratic Reforms & Utilisation of the
Political Struggle and Parliamentarism
17. Abolition of all restrictions without exception on the political rights of women
compared with those of men. It must be explained to the masses why this reform is
particularly urgent at the present time, when the war and the high cost of living are
agitating the minds of the broad masses and, in particular, are rousing the interest and
the attention of women towards politics.n

Written in October-November 1916.

From The Tasks of the Proletariat in
Our Revolution
12. The substitution of a people’s militia for the police is a reform that follows from the
entire course of the revolution and that is now being introduced in most parts of
Russia. We must explain to the people that in most of the bourgeois revolutions of the
usual type, this reform was always extremely short-lived, and that the bourgeoisie —
even the most democratic and republican — restored the police of the old, tsarist type,
a police divorced from the people, commanded by the bourgeoisie and capable of
oppressing the people in every way.
There is only one way to prevent the restoration of the police, and that is to create
a people’s militia and to fuse it with the army (the standing army to be replaced by the
arming of the entire people). Service in this militia should extend to all citizens of both
sexes between the ages of 15 and 65 without exception, if these tentatively suggested
age limits may be taken as indicating the participation of adolescents and old people.
Capitalists must pay their workers, servants, etc., for days devoted to public service in
the militia. Unless women are brought to take an independent part not only in political
life generally, but also in daily and universal public service, it is no use talking about full
and stable democracy, let alone socialism. And such “police” functions as care of the
sick and of homeless children, food inspection, etc., will never be satisfactorily discharged
until women are on an equal footing with men, not merely nominally but in reality.
The tasks which the proletariat must put before the people in order to safeguard,
consolidate and develop the revolution are to prevent the restoration of the police and
to enlist the organisational forces of the entire people in forming a people’s militia.n

First published in September 1917 as a pamphlet.
On the Emancipation of Women

From Materials Relating to the
Revision of the Party Program
The constitution of the Russian democratic republic must ensure:
1. The sovereignty of the people; supreme power in the state must be vested
entirely in the people’s representatives, who shall be elected by the people and be
subject to recall at any time, and who shall constitute a single popular assembly, a
single chamber.
1. The sovereignty of the people, i.e., the concentration of supreme state power in the
hands of a legislative assembly, consisting of the representatives of the people and constituting
a single chamber.
2. Universal, equal, and direct suffrage for all citizens, men and women, who have
reached the age of twenty, in the elections to the legislative assembly and to the various
bodies of local self-government; secret ballot: the right of every voter to be elected to
any representative institution; biennial parliaments; salaries to be paid to the people’s
representatives; proportional representation at all elections; all delegates and elected
officials, without exception, to be subject to recall at any time upon the decision of a
majority of their electors.
3. Local self-government on a broad scale; regional self-government in localities
where the composition of the population and living and social conditions are of a
specific nature; the abolition of all state-appointed local and regional authorities.
4. Inviolability of person and domicile.
5. Unrestricted freedom of conscience, speech, the press, assembly, strikes, and
association.
6. Freedom of movement and occupation.
Written in April-May 1917. Those parts of the old program which remained unchanged in the
new one are set in ordinary type; those parts of the old program which were to be completely
deleted are given in italics; those parts of the new program which were not in the old program
are given in bold. — Ed.

Materials Relating to the Revision of the Party Program
7. Abolition of the social-estates; equal rights for all citizens irrespective of sex,
creed, race, or nationality.
8). The right of the population to receive instruction in their native tongue in
schools to be established for the purpose at the expense of the state and local organs
of self-government; the right of every citizen to use his native language at meetings;
the native language to be used on a level with the official language in all local public and
state institutions; obligatory official language to be abolished.
9. The right of self-determination for all member nations of the state.
9. The right of all member nations of the state to freely secede and form
independent states. The republic of the Russian nation must attract other nations or
nationalities not by force, but exclusively by voluntary agreement to form a common
state. The unity and fraternal alliance of the workers of all countries is incompatible
with the use of force, direct or indirect, against other nationalities.
10. The right of all persons to sue any official in the regular way before a jury.
11. Election of judges by the people.
11. Judges and other officials, both civil and military, to be elected by the people
with the right to recall any of them at any time by decision of a majority of their
electors.
12. Replacement of the standing army by the universally armed people.
12. The police and standing army to be replaced by the universally armed people;
workers and other employees to receive regular wages from the capitalists for the
time devoted to public service in the people’s militia.
13. Separation of the church from the state, and schools from the church; schools
to be absolutely secular.
14. Free and compulsory general and vocational education for all children of both
sexes up to the age of 16; poor children to be provided with food, clothing, and school
supplies at the expense of the state.
14. Free and compulsory general and polytechnical education (familiarising the
student with the theoretical and practical aspects of the most important fields of
production) for all children of both sexes up to the age of 16; training of children to
be closely integrated with socially productive work.
15. All students to be provided with food, clothing, and school supplies at the
cost of the state.
16. Public education to be administered by democratically elected organs of
local self-government; the central government not to be allowed to interfere with the
arrangement of the school curriculum, or with the selection of the teaching staffs;
teachers to be elected directly by the population with the right of the latter to remove
On the Emancipation of Women

undesirable teachers.
As a basic condition for the democratisation of our country’s national economy,
the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party demands the abolition of all indirect
taxes and the establishment of a progressive tax on incomes and inheritances.
The high level of development of capitalism already achieved in banking and in
the trustified branches of industry, on the one hand, and the economic disruption
caused by the imperialist war, everywhere evoking a demand for state and public
control of the production and distribution of all staple products, on the other, induce
the party to demand the nationalisation of the banks, syndicates (trusts), etc.
To safeguard the working class from physical and moral deterioration, and develop
its ability to carry on the struggle for emancipation, the party demands:
1. An eight-hour working day for all wage-workers.
1. An eight-hour working day for all wage-workers, including a break of not less
than one hour for meals where work is continuous. In dangerous and unhealthy
industries the working day to be reduced from four to six hours.
2. A statutory weekly uninterrupted rest period of not less than 42 hours for all
wage-workers of both sexes in all branches of the national economy.
3. Complete prohibition of overtime work.
4. Prohibition of night work (from 9pm to 6am) in all branches of the national
economy except in cases where it is absolutely necessary for technical reasons endorsed by
the labour organisations.
4. Prohibition of night work (from 8pm to 6am) in all branches of the national
economy except in cases where it is absolutely necessary for technical reasons endorsed
by the labour organisations — provided, however, that night work does not exceed
four hours.
5. Prohibition of the employment of children of school age (under 16) and restriction
of the working day of adolescents (from 16 to 18) to six hours.
5. Prohibition of the employment of children of school age (under 16), restriction
of the working day of adolescents (from 16 to 20) to four hours, and prohibition of
the employment of adolescents on night work in unhealthy industries and mines.
6. Prohibition of female labour in all branches of industry injurious to women’s
health; women to be released from work for four weeks before and six weeks after childbirth,
without loss of pay.
6. Prohibition of female labour in all branches of industry injurious to women’s
health; prohibition of night work for women; women to be released from work eight
weeks before and eight weeks after childbirth, without loss of pay and with free
medical and medicinal aid.

Materials Relating to the Revision of the Party Program
7. Establishment of nurseries for infants and young children at all factories and other
enterprises where women are employed; nursing mothers to be allowed recesses of at least
half-hour duration at intervals of not more than three hours.
7. Establishment of nurseries for infants and young children and rooms for
nursing mothers at all factories and other enterprises where women are employed;
nursing mothers to be allowed recesses of at least half-hour duration at intervals of
not more than three hours; such mothers to receive nursing benefit and their working
day to be reduced to six hours.
8. State insurance for workers covering old age and total or partial disablement out of
a special fund formed by a special tax on the capitalists.
8. Full social insurance of workers:
a. for all forms of wage-labour;
b. for all forms of disablement, namely, sickness, injury, infirmity, old age,
occupational disease, childbirth, widowhood, orphanhood, and also unemployment,
etc.;
c. all insurance institutions to be administered entirely by the insured themselves;
d. the cost of insurance to be borne by the capitalists;
e. free medical and medicinal aid under the control of self-governing sick benefit
societies, the management bodies of which are to be elected by the workers.
9. Payment of wages in kind to be prohibited; regular weekly pay-days to be fixed in all
labour contracts without exception and wages to be paid in cash and during working
hours.
10. Prohibition of deductions by employers from wages on any pretext or for any
purpose whatsoever (fines, spoilage, etc.).
11. Appointment of an adequate number of factory inspectors in all branches of the
national economy; factory inspection to be extended to all enterprises employing hired
labour, including government enterprises (domestic service also to be liable to inspection);
women inspectors to be appointed in industries where female labour is employed;
representatives elected by the workers and paid by the state to supervise the enforcement of
the factory laws, the fixing of rates and the passing or rejection of raw materials and
finished products.
9. The establishment of a labour inspectorate elected by the workers’
organisations and covering all enterprises employing hired labour, as well as domestic
servants; women inspectors to be appointed in enterprises where female labour is
employed.n
On the Emancipation of Women

From Can the Bolsheviks Retain State
Power?
The proletariat, we are told, will not be able to set the state apparatus in motion.
Since the 1905 Revolution, Russia has been governed by 130,000 landowners, who
have perpetrated endless violence against 150 million people, heaped unconstrained
abuse upon them, and condemned the vast majority to inhuman toil and semistarvation.
Yet we are told that the 240,000 members of the Bolshevik Party will not be able to
govern Russia, govern her in the interests of the poor and against the rich. These
240,000 are already backed by no less than a million votes of the adult population, for
this is precisely the proportion between the number of party members and the number
of votes cast for the party that has been established by the experience of Europe and
the experience of Russia as shown, for example, by the elections to the Petrograd City
Council last August. We therefore already have a “state apparatus” of one million
people devoted to the socialist state for the sake of high ideals and not for the sake of
a fat sum received on the 20th of every month.
In addition to that we have a “magic way” to enlarge our state apparatus tenfold at
once, at one stroke, a way which no capitalist state ever possessed or could possess.
This magic way is to draw the working people, to draw the poor, into the daily work of
state administration.
To explain how easy it will be to employ this magic way and how faultlessly it will
operate, let us take the simplest and most striking example possible.
The state is to forcibly evict a certain family from a flat and move another in. This
often happens in the capitalist state, and it will also happen in our proletarian or
socialist state.
The capitalist state evicts a working-class family which has lost its breadwinner and
cannot pay the rent. The bailiff appears with police, or militia, a whole squad of them.
To effect an eviction in a working-class district a whole detachment of Cossacks is
Written in September-October 1917.

Can the Bolsheviks Retain State Power?
required. Why? Because the bailiff and the militiaman refuse to go without a very
strong military guard. They know that the scene of an eviction arouses such fury
among the neighbours, among thousands and thousands of people who have been
driven to the verge of desperation, arouses such hatred towards the capitalists and the
capitalist state, that the bailiff and the squad of militiamen run the risk of being torn to
pieces at any minute. Large military forces are required, several regiments must be
brought into a big city, and the troops must come from some distant, outlying region
so that the soldiers will not be familiar with the life of the urban poor, so that the
soldiers will not be “infected” with socialism.
The proletarian state has to forcibly move a very poor family into a rich man’s flat.
Let us suppose that our squad of workers’ militia is 15 strong: two sailors, two soldiers,
two class-conscious workers (of whom, let us suppose, only one is a member of our
party, or a sympathiser), one intellectual, and eight from the poor working people, of
whom at least five must be women, domestic servants, unskilled labourers, and so
forth. The squad arrives at the rich man’s flat, inspects it and finds that it consists of
five rooms occupied by two men and two women — “You must squeeze up a bit into
two rooms this winter, citizens, and prepare two rooms for two families now living in
cellars. Until the time when, with the aid of engineers (you are an engineer, aren’t
you?), we have built good dwellings for everybody, you will have to squeeze up a little.
Your telephone will serve 10 families. This will save 100 hours of work wasted on
shopping, and so forth. Now in your family there are two unemployed persons who
can perform light work: a citizeness 55 years of age and a citizen 14 years of age. They
will be on duty for three hours a day supervising the proper distribution of provisions
for 10 families and keeping the necessary account of this. The student citizen in our
squad will now write out this state order in two copies and you will be kind enough to
give us a signed declaration that you will faithfully carry it out.”
This, in my opinion, shows, by means of striking examples, how the distinction
between the old bourgeois and the new socialist state apparatus and state administration
could be illustrated.
We are not utopians. We know that an unskilled labourer or a cook cannot
immediately get on with the job of state administration. In this we agree with the
Cadets, with Breshkovskaya, and with Tsereteli. We differ, however, from these citizens
in that we demand an immediate break with the prejudiced view that only the rich, or
officials chosen from rich families, are capable of administering the state, of performing
the ordinary, everyday work of administration. We demand that training in the work
of state administration be conducted by class-conscious workers and soldiers and that
this training be begun at once, i.e., that a beginning be made at once in training all the
On the Emancipation of Women

working people, all the poor, for this work.
We know that the Cadets are also willing to teach the people democracy. Cadet
ladies are willing to deliver lectures to domestic servants on equal rights for women in
accordance with the best English and French sources. And also, at the very next concertmeeting, before an audience of thousands, an exchange of kisses will be arranged on
the platform: the Cadet lady lecturer will kiss Breshkovskaya, Breshkovskaya will kiss
ex-minister Tsereteli, and the grateful people will therefore receive an object-lesson in
republican equality, liberty and fraternity …
Yes, we agree that the Cadets, Breshkovskaya and Tsereteli are in their own way
devoted to democracy and are propagating it among the people. But what is to be
done if our conception of democracy is somewhat different from theirs?
In our opinion, to ease the incredible burdens and miseries of the war and also to
heal the terrible wounds the war has inflicted on the people, revolutionary democracy
is needed, revolutionary measures of the kind described in the example of the
distribution of housing accommodation in the interests of the poor. Exactly the same
procedure must be adopted in both town and country for the distribution of provisions,
clothing, footwear, etc., in respect of the land in the rural districts, and so forth. For the
administration of the state in this spirit we can at once set in motion a state apparatus
consisting of 10 if not 20 million people, an apparatus such as no capitalist state has
ever known. We alone can create such an apparatus, for we are sure of the fullest and
devoted sympathy of the vast majority of the population. We alone can create such an
apparatus, because we have class-conscious workers disciplined by long capitalist
“schooling” (it was not for nothing that we went to learn in the school of capitalism),
workers who are capable of forming a workers’ militia and of gradually expanding it
(beginning to expand it at once) into a militia embracing the whole people. The classconscious workers must lead, but for the work of administration they can enlist the
vast mass of the working and oppressed people.
It goes without saying that this new apparatus is bound to make mistakes in taking
its first steps. But did not the peasants make mistakes when they emerged from
serfdom and began to manage their own affairs? Is there any way other than practice
by which the people can learn to govern themselves and to avoid mistakes? Is there
any way other than by proceeding immediately to genuine self-government by the
people? The chief thing now is to abandon the prejudiced bourgeois-intellectualist
view that only special officials, who by their very social position are entirely dependent
upon capital, can administer the state. The chief thing is to put an end to the state of
affairs in which bourgeois officials and “socialist” ministers are trying to govern in the
old way but are incapable of doing so and, after seven months, are faced with a peasant

Can the Bolsheviks Retain State Power?
revolt in a peasant country! The chief thing is to imbue the oppressed and working
people with confidence in their own strength, to prove to them in practice that they can
and must themselves undertake the proper, most strictly regulated and organised
distribution of bread, all kinds of food, milk, clothing, housing, etc., in the interests of
the poor. Unless this is done, Russia cannot be saved from collapse and ruin. The
conscientious, bold, universal move to hand over administrative work to proletarians
and semiproletarians, will rouse such unprecedented revolutionary enthusiasm among
the people, will so multiply the people’s forces in combating distress, that much that
seemed impossible to our narrow, old, bureaucratic forces will become possible for
the millions, who will begin to work for themselves and not for the capitalists, the gentry,
the bureaucrats, and not out of fear of punishment.
à à à
[…]
To fear the resistance of the capitalists and yet to call oneself a revolutionary, to
wish to be regarded as a socialist — isn’t that disgraceful? How low must international
socialism, corrupted by opportunism, have fallen ideologically if such voices could be
raised!
We have already seen the strength of the capitalists’ resistance; the entire people
have seen it, for the capitalists are more class-conscious than the other classes and at
once realised the significance of the soviets, at once exerted all their efforts to the
utmost, resorted to everything, went to all lengths, resorted to the most incredible lies
and slander, to military plots in order to frustrate the soviets, to reduce them to nought,
to prostitute them (with the aid of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries), to
transform them into talking-shops, to wear down the peasants and workers by months
and months of empty talk and playing at revolution.
We have not yet seen, however, the strength of resistance of the proletarians and
poor peasants, for this strength will become fully apparent only when power is in the
hands of the proletariat, when tens of millions of people who have been crushed by
want and capitalist slavery see from experience and feel that state power has passed
into the hands of the oppressed classes, that the state is helping the poor to fight the
landowners and capitalists, is breaking their resistance. Only then shall we see what
untapped forces of resistance to the capitalists are latent among the people; only then
will what Engels called “latent socialism” manifest itself. Only then, for every 10,000
overt and concealed enemies of working-class rule, manifesting themselves actively or
by passive resistance, there will arise a million new fighters who have been politically
dormant, suffering in the torments of poverty and despair, having ceased to believe
On the Emancipation of Women

that they are human, that they have the right to live, that they too can be served by the
entire might of the modern centralised state, that their contingents of the proletarian
militia can, with the fullest confidence, also be called upon to take a direct, immediate,
daily part in state administration.
The capitalists and landowners, with the benevolent assistance of Plekhanov,
Breshkovskaya, Tsereteli, Chernov and Co., have done everything in their power to
defile the democratic republic, to defile it by servility to wealth to such a degree that the
people are being overcome by apathy, indifference; it is all the same to them, because
the hungry man cannot see the difference between the republic and the monarchy; the
freezing, barefooted, worn-out soldier sacrificing his life for alien interests is not able
to love the republic.
But when every labourer, every unemployed worker, every cook, every ruined
peasant sees, not from the newspapers, but with his own eyes, that the proletarian
state is not cringing to wealth but is helping the poor, that this state does not hesitate
to adopt revolutionary measures, that it confiscates surplus stocks of provisions from
the parasites and distributes them to the hungry, that it forcibly installs the homeless
in the houses of the rich, that it compels the rich to pay for milk but does not give them
a drop until the children of all poor families are sufficiently supplied, that the land is
being transferred to the working people and the factories and banks are being placed
under the control of the workers and that immediate and severe punishment is meted
out to the millionaires who conceal their wealth — when the poor see and feel this, no
capitalist or kulak forces, no forces of world finance capital which manipulates thousands
of millions, will vanquish the people’s revolution; on the contrary, the socialist revolution
will triumph all over the world for it is maturing in all countries.
Our revolution will be invincible if it is not afraid of itself, if it transfers all power to
the proletariat, for behind us stand the immeasurably larger, more developed, more
organised world forces of the proletariat which are temporarily held down by the war
but not destroyed; on the contrary, the war has multiplied them.n

Speech at the First All-Russia
Congress of Working Women
Comrades, in a certain sense this congress of the women’s section of the workers’
army has a special significance, because one of the hardest things in every country has
been to stir the women into action. There can be no socialist revolution unless very
many working women take a big part in it.
In all civilised countries, even the most advanced, women are actually no more
than domestic slaves. Women do not enjoy full equality in any capitalist state, not even
in the freest of republics.
One of the primary tasks of the Soviet Republic is to abolish all restrictions on
women’s rights. The Soviet government has completely abolished divorce proceedings,
that source of bourgeois degradation, repression and humiliation.
It will soon be a year now since complete freedom of divorce was legislated. We
have passed a decree annulling all distinction between legitimate and illegitimate children
and removing several political restrictions. Nowhere else in the world have equality
and freedom for working women been so fully established.
We know that it is the working-class woman who has to bear the full brunt of
antiquated codes.
For the first time in history, our law has removed everything that denied women
rights. But the important thing is not the law. In the cities and industrial areas this law
on complete freedom of marriage is doing all right, but in the countryside it all too
frequently remains a dead letter. There the religious marriage still predominates. This
is due to the influence of the priests, an evil that is harder to combat than the old
legislation.
We must be extremely careful in fighting religious prejudices; some people cause
a lot of harm in this struggle by offending religious feelings. We must use propaganda
and education. By lending too sharp an edge to the struggle we may only arouse
Speech delivered November 19, 1918.
On the Emancipation of Women

popular resentment; such methods of struggle tend to perpetuate the division of the
people along religious lines, whereas our strength lies in unity. The deepest source of
religious prejudice is poverty and ignorance; and that is the evil we have to combat.
The status of women up to now has been compared to that of a slave; women have
been tied to the home, and only socialism can save them from this. They will only be
completely emancipated when we can get rid of the small peasant farms to proceed to
cooperative farming and use collective methods to work the land. That is a difficult
task. But now that Poor Peasant Committees27 are being formed, the time has come
when the socialist revolution is being consolidated.
The poorest part of the rural population is only now beginning to organise, but
socialism is acquiring a firm foundation in these organisations of poor peasants.
Before, often the town became revolutionary and then the countryside.
But the present revolution relies on the countryside, and therein lie its significance
and strength. The experience of all liberation movements has shown that the success
of a revolution depends on how much the women take part in it. The Soviet government
is doing everything in its power to enable women to carry on independent proletarian
socialist work.
The Soviet government is in a difficult situation because the imperialists of all
countries hate Soviet Russia and are preparing to go to war with her for kindling the
fire of revolution in a number of countries and for taking determined steps towards
socialism.
Now that they are out to destroy revolutionary Russia, the ground is beginning to
burn under their own feet. You know how the revolutionary movement is spreading
in Germany. In Denmark the workers are fighting their government. In Holland and
Switzerland the revolutionary movement is getting stronger. The revolutionary
movement in these small countries has no importance in itself, but it is particularly
significant because there was no war in these countries and they had the most
“constitutional” democratic system. If countries like these are stirring into action, it
makes us sure the revolutionary movement is taking a hold all over the world.
No other republic has so far been able to emancipate woman. The Soviet
government is helping her. Our cause is invincible because the invincible working class
is rising in all countries. This movement signifies the spread of the invincible socialist
revolution. (Prolonged applause. All sing the Internationale.)n

From Draft Program of the RCP(B)
First paragraph of section of the program on the courts
On the road to communism through the dictatorship of the proletariat, the Communist
Party, rejecting democratic slogans, completely abolishes also such organs of bourgeois
rule as the old courts and replaces them by class courts of workers and peasants. After
taking all power into its hands, the proletariat puts forward, instead of the old vague
formula, “Election of judges by the people”, the class slogan, “Election of judges from
the working people by none but the working people”, and carries it into practice
throughout the judicial system. With regard to the election of judges from workers
and peasants only who do not employ wage labour for profit, the Communist Party
makes no distinction on account of sex but allows men and women completely equal
rights both in electing judges and in exercising judicial functions. Having repealed the
laws of the overthrown governments, the party gives the judges elected by soviet
electors the slogan: enforce the will of the proletariat and apply its decrees or, in the
absence of a suitable decree, or if the relevant decree is inadequate, take guidance
from your socialist sense of justice, ignoring the laws of the deposed governments.n

The new program was adopted by the Eighth Congress of the RCP(B) in March 1919.
On the Emancipation of Women

From A Great Beginning
Heroism of the workers in the rear.
‘Communist subbotniks’30
We must all admit that vestiges of the bourgeois-intellectual phrase-mongering
approach to questions of the revolution are in evidence at every step, everywhere,
even in our own ranks. Our press, for example, does little to fight these rotten survivals
of the rotten bourgeois-democratic past; it does little to foster the simple, modest,
ordinary but virile shoots of genuine communism.
Take the position of women. In this field, not a single democratic party in the
world, not even in the most advanced bourgeois republic, has done in decades so
much as a hundredth part of what we did in our very first year in power. We actually
razed to the ground the infamous laws placing women in a position of inequality,
restricting divorce and surrounding it with disgusting formalities, denying recognition
to children born out of wedlock, enforcing a search for their fathers, etc., laws numerous
survivals of which, to the shame of the bourgeoisie and of capitalism, are to be found
in all civilised countries. We have a thousand times the right to be proud of what we
have done in this field. But the more thoroughly we clear the ground of the lumber of
the old, bourgeois laws and institutions, the more we realise that we have only cleared
the ground to build on, but are not yet building.
Notwithstanding all the laws emancipating woman, she continues to be a domestic
slave, because petty housework crushes, strangles, stultifies and degrades her, chains
her to the kitchen and the nursery, and she wastes her labour on barbarously
unproductive, petty, nerve-racking, stultifying and crushing drudgery. The real
emancipation of women, real communism, will begin only where and when an all-out
struggle begins (led by the proletariat wielding the state power) against this petty
housekeeping, or rather when its wholesale transformation into a large-scale socialist
First published as a pamphlet in Moscow in July 1919.

A Great Beginning
economy begins.
Do we in practice pay sufficient attention to this question, which in theory every
communist considers indisputable? Of course not. Do we take proper care of the
shoots of communism which already exist in this sphere? Again the answer is no. Public
catering establishments, nurseries, kindergartens — here we have examples of these
shoots, here we have the simple, everyday means, involving nothing pompous,
grandiloquent or ceremonial, which can really emancipate women, really lessen and
abolish their inequality with men as regards their role in social production and public
life. These means are not new, they (like all the material prerequisites for socialism)
were created by large-scale capitalism. But under capitalism they remained, first, a
rarity, and secondly — which is particularly important — either profit-making
enterprises, with all the worst features of speculation, profiteering, cheating and fraud,
or “acrobatics of bourgeois charity”, which the best workers rightly hated and despised.
There is no doubt that the number of these institutions in our country has increased
enormously and that they are beginning to change in character. There is no doubt that
we have far more organising talent among the women workers and peasant women
than we are aware of, that we have far more people than we know of who can organise
practical work, with the cooperation of large numbers of workers and of still larger
numbers of consumers, without the abundance of talk, fuss, squabbling and chatter
about plans, systems, etc., with which our bigheaded “intellectuals” or half-baked
“communists” are “affected”. But we do not nurse these shoots of the new as we
should.
Look at the bourgeoisie. How very well they know how to advertise what they
need! See how millions of copies of their newspapers extol what the capitalists regard
as “model” enterprises, and how “model” bourgeois institutions are made an object of
national pride! Our press does not take the trouble, or hardly ever, to describe the best
catering establishments or nurseries, in order, by daily insistence, to get some of them
turned into models of their kind. It does not give them enough publicity, does not
describe in detail the saving in human labour, the conveniences for the consumer, the
economy of products, the emancipation of women from domestic slavery, the
improvement in sanitary conditions, that is achieved with exemplary communist work,
that can be achieved and can be extended to the whole of society, to all working people.
Exemplary production, exemplary communist subbotniks, exemplary care and
conscientiousness in procuring and distributing every pood of grain, exemplary catering
establishments, exemplary cleanliness in such-and-such a workers’ house, in suchand-such a block, should all receive 10 times more attention and care from our press,
as well as from every workers’ and peasants’ organisation, than they receive now. All
On the Emancipation of Women

these are shoots of communism, and it is our common and primary duty to nurse
them. Difficult as our food and production situation is, in the 18 months of Bolshevik
rule there has been undoubted progress all along the line: grain procurements have
increased from 30 million poods (from August 1, 1917, to August 1, 1918) to 100
million poodsa (from August 1, 1918, to May 1, 1919); vegetable gardening has
expanded, the margin of unsown land has diminished, railway transport has begun to
improve despite the enormous fuel difficulties, and so on. Against this general
background and with the support of the proletarian state power, the shoots of
communism will not wither; they will grow and blossom into complete communism.n

a Pood — an old Russian measure of weight equal to 16.381kg. — Ed.

The Tasks of the Working Women’s
Movement in the Soviet Republic31
Speech delivered at the Fourth Moscow City Conference
of Nonparty Working Women
Comrades, it gives me pleasure to greet a conference of working women. I will allow
myself to pass over those subjects and questions that, of course, at the moment are the
cause of the greatest concern to every working woman and to every politically conscious
individual from among the working people; these are the most urgent questions —
that of bread and that of the war situation. I know from the newspaper reports of your
meetings that these questions have been dealt with exhaustively by Comrade Trotsky
as far as war questions are concerned and by Comrades Yakovleva and Svidersky as
far as the bread question is concerned; please, therefore, allow me to pass over those
questions.
I should like to say a few words about the general tasks facing the working women’s
movement in the Soviet Republic, those that are, in general, connected with the transition
to socialism, and those that are of particular urgency at the present time. Comrades, the
question of the position of women was raised by Soviet power from the very beginning.
It seems to me that any workers’ state in the course of transition to socialism is faced with
a double task. The first part of that task is relatively simple and easy. It concerns those old
laws that kept women in a position of inequality as compared to men.
Participants in all emancipation movements in Western Europe have long since,
not for decades but for centuries, put forward the demand that obsolete laws be
annulled and women and men be made equal by law, but none of the democratic
European states, none of the advanced republics have succeeded in putting it into
effect, because wherever there is capitalism, wherever there is private property in land
Speech delivered September 23, 1919.
On the Emancipation of Women

and factories, wherever the power of capital is preserved, the men retain their privileges.
It was possible to put it into effect in Russia only because the power of the workers has
been established here since October 25, 1917. From the very onset Soviet power set
out to be the power of the working people, hostile to all forms of exploitation. It set
itself the task of doing away with the possibility of the exploitation of the working
people by the landowners and capitalists, of doing away with the rule of capital. Soviet
power has been trying to make it possible for the working people to organise their lives
without private property in land, without privately-owned factories, without that private
property that everywhere, throughout the world, even where there is complete political
liberty, even in the most democratic republics, keeps the working people in a state of
what is actually poverty, and wage-slavery, and women in a state of double slavery.
Soviet power, the power of the working people, in the first months of its existence
effected a very definite revolution in legislation that concerns women. Nothing whatever
is left in the Soviet Republic of those laws that put women in a subordinate position. I
am speaking specifically of those laws that took advantage of the weaker position of
women and put them in a position of inequality and often, even, in a humiliating
position, i.e., the laws on divorce and on children born out of wedlock and on the right
of a woman to summon the father of a child for maintenance.
It is particularly in this sphere that bourgeois legislation, even, it must be said, in
the most advanced countries, takes advantage of the weaker position of women to
humiliate them and give them a status of inequality. It is particularly in this sphere that
Soviet power has left nothing whatever of the old, unjust laws that were intolerable for
working people. We may now say proudly and without any exaggeration that apart
from Soviet Russia there is not a country in the world where women enjoy full equality
and where women are not placed in the humiliating position felt particularly in day-today family life. This was one of our first and most important tasks.
If you have occasion to come into contact with parties that are hostile to the
Bolsheviks, if there should come into your hands newspapers published in Russian in
the regions occupied by Kolchak or Denikin, or if you happen to talk to people who
share the views of those newspapers, you may often hear from them the accusation
that Soviet power has violated democracy.
We, the representatives of Soviet power, Bolshevik communists and supporters of
Soviet power are often accused of violating democracy and proof of this is given by
citing the fact that Soviet power dispersed the Constituent Assembly. We usually
answer this accusation as follows: that democracy and that Constituent Assembly
which came into being when private property still existed on earth, when there was no
equality between people, when the one who possessed his own capital was the boss

The Tasks of the Working Women’s Movement in the Soviet Republic
and the others worked for him and were his wage slaves — that was a democracy on
which we place no value. Such democracy concealed slavery even in the most advanced
countries. We socialists are supporters of democracy only insofar as it eases the position
of the working and oppressed people. Throughout the world socialism has set itself
the task of combating every kind of exploitation of man by man. That democracy has
real value for us which serves the exploited, the under-privileged. If those who do not
work are disfranchised that would be real equality between people. Those who do not
work should not eat.
In reply to these accusations we say that the question must be presented in this
way — how is democracy implemented in various countries? We see that equality is
proclaimed in all democratic republics but in the civil laws and in laws on the rights of
women, those that concern their position in the family and on divorce, we see inequality
and the humiliation of women at every step, and we say that this is a violation of
democracy specifically in respect of the oppressed. Soviet power has implemented
democracy to a greater degree than any of the other, most advanced countries because
it has not left in its laws any trace of the inequality of women. Again I say that no other
state and no other legislation has ever done for women a half of what Soviet power did
in the first months of its existence.
Laws alone, of course, are not enough, and we are by no means content with mere
decrees. In the sphere of legislation, however, we have done everything required of us to
put women in a position of equality and we have every right to be proud of it. The position
of women in Soviet Russia is now ideal as compared with their position in the most
advanced states. We tell ourselves, however, that this is, of course, only the beginning.
Owing to her work in the house, the woman is still in a difficult position. To effect
her complete emancipation and make her the equal of the man it is necessary for
housework to be socialised and for women to participate in common productive
labour. Then women will occupy the same position as men.
Here we are not, of course, speaking of making women the equal of men as far as
productivity of labour, the quantity of labour, the length of the working day, labour
conditions, etc., are concerned; we mean that the woman should not, unlike the man,
be oppressed because of her economic position. You all know that even when women
have full rights, they still remain downtrodden because all housework is left to them.
In most cases housework is the most unproductive, the most savage and the most
arduous work a woman can do. It is exceptionally petty and does not include anything
that would in any way promote the development of the woman.
In pursuance of the socialist ideal we want to struggle for the full implementation
of socialism, and here an extensive field of labour opens up before women. We are
On the Emancipation of Women

now making serious preparations to clear the ground for the building of socialism, but
the building of socialism will begin only when we have achieved the complete equality
of women and undertake the new work together with women who have been
emancipated from that petty, stultifying, unproductive work. This is a job that will take
us many, many years.
This work cannot show any rapid results and will not produce a scintillating effect.
We are setting up model institutions, dining rooms and nurseries, that will
emancipate women from housework. And the work of organising all these institutions
will fall mainly to women. It has to be admitted that in Russia today there are very few
institutions that would help woman out of her state of household slavery. There is an
insignificant number of them, and the conditions now obtaining in the Soviet Republic
— the war and the food situation about which comrades have already given you the
details — hinder us in this work. Still, it must be said that these institutions that liberate
women from their position as household slaves are springing up wherever it is in any
way possible.
We say that the emancipation of the workers must be effected by the workers
themselves, and in exactly the same way the emancipation of working women is a
matter for the working women themselves. The working women must themselves see
to it that such institutions are developed, and this activity will bring about a complete
change in their position as compared with what it was under the old, capitalist society.
In order to be active in politics under the old, capitalist regime special training was
required, so that women played an insignificant part in politics, even in the most
advanced and free capitalist countries. Our task is to make politics available to every
working woman. Ever since private property in land and factories has been abolished
and the power of the landowners and capitalists overthrown, the tasks of politics have
become simple, clear and comprehensible to the working people as a whole, and to
working women as well. In capitalist society the women’s position is marked by such
inequality that her participation in politics is only an insignificant fraction of man’s
participation. The power of the working people is necessary for a change to be wrought
in this situation, for then the main tasks of politics will consist of matters directly
affecting the fate of the working people themselves.
Here, too, the participation of working women is essential — not only of party
members and politically conscious women, but also of the nonparty women and those
who are least politically conscious. Here Soviet power opens up a wide field of activity
to working women.
We have had a difficult time in the struggle against the forces hostile to Soviet
Russia that have attacked her. It was difficult for us to fight on the battlefield against

The Tasks of the Working Women’s Movement in the Soviet Republic
those forces who went to war against the power of the working people and in the field
of food supplies against the profiteers, because the number of people, the number of
working people, who came wholeheartedly to our aid with their own labour was much
too small. Here, too, there is nothing Soviet power can appreciate as much as the help
given by masses of nonparty working women. They may know that in the old bourgeois
society, perhaps, a complicated training was necessary for participation in politics and
that this was not available to women. The political activity of the Soviet Republic is
mainly the struggle against the landowners and capitalists, the struggle for the
elimination of exploitation; political activity, therefore, is made available to the working
woman in the Soviet Republic and it will consist in the working woman using her
organisational ability to help the working man.
What we need is not only organisational work on a scale involving millions; we
need organisational work on the smallest scale and this makes it possible for women to
work as well. Women can work under war conditions when it is a question of helping
the army or carrying on agitation in the army. Women should take an active part in all
this so that the Red Army sees that it is being looked after, that solicitude is being
displayed. Women can also work in the sphere of food distribution, on the improvement
of public catering and everywhere opening dining rooms like those that are so numerous
in Petrograd.
It is in these fields that the activities of working women acquire the greatest
organisational significance. The participation of working women is also essential in the
organisation and running of big experimental farms which should not be a task for
individuals. This is something that cannot be carried out without the participation of a
large number of working women. Working women will be very useful in this field in
supervising the distribution of food and in making food products more easily
obtainable. This work can well be done by nonparty working women and its
accomplishment will do more than anything else to strengthen socialist society.
We have abolished private property in land and almost completely abolished the
private ownership of factories; Soviet power is now trying to ensure that all working
people, nonparty as well as party members, women as well as men, should take part in
this economic development. The work that Soviet power has begun can only make
progress when, instead of a few hundreds, millions and millions of women throughout
Russia take part in it. We are sure that the cause of socialist development will then
become sound. Then the working people will show that they can live and run their
country without the aid of the landowners and capitalists. Then socialist construction
will be so soundly based in Russia that no external enemies in other countries and
none inside Russia will be any danger to the Soviet Republic.n
On the Emancipation of Women

Soviet Power & the Status of Women
The second anniversary of Soviet power is an occasion for taking stock of what has
been done during this period and for reflecting on the significance and the aims of the
revolution that has been accomplished.
The bourgeoisie and its supporters charge us with having violated democracy. We,
on the other hand, assert that the Soviet revolution has given an unprecedented impulse
to the development of democracy in breadth and in depth, democracy, that is, for the
working people oppressed by capitalism, democracy for the overwhelming majority
of the people, socialist democracy (for the working people), as distinct from bourgeois
democracy (for the exploiters, for the capitalists, for the rich).
Who is right?
To give proper thought to this question and achieve a deeper understanding of it
one must take stock of the experience of these two years and make better preparations
for its further development.
The status of women makes clear in the most striking fashion the difference between
bourgeois and socialist democracy and furnishes a most effective reply to the question
posed.
In a bourgeois republic (i.e., where there is private ownership of land, factories,
shares, etc.), be it the most democratic republic, women have never had equal rights,
anywhere in the world, in any one of the more advanced countries. And this despite the
fact that more than 125 years have passed since the French (bourgeois-democratic)
Revolution.
In words bourgeois democracy promises equality and freedom, but in practice not
a single bourgeois republic, even the more advanced, has granted women (half the
human race) and men complete equality in the eyes of the law, or delivered women
from dependence on and the oppression of the male.
Bourgeois democracy is the democracy of pompous phrases, solemn words, lavish
promises and high-sounding slogans about freedom and equality, but in practice all
First published in Pravda, November 6, 1919.

Soviet Power & the Status of Women
this cloaks the lack of freedom and the inequality of women, the lack of freedom and
the inequality for the working and exploited people.
Soviet or socialist democracy sweeps away these pompous but false words and
declares ruthless war on the hypocrisy of “democrats”, landowners, capitalists and
farmers with bursting bins who are piling up wealth by selling surplus grain to the
starving workers at speculation prices.
Down with this foul lie! There is no “equality”, nor can there be, of oppressed and
oppressor, exploited and exploiter. There is no real “freedom”, nor can there be, so
long as women are handicapped by men’s legal privileges, so long as there is no
freedom for the worker from the yoke of capital, no freedom for the labouring peasant
from the yoke of the capitalist, landowner and merchant.
Let the liars and the hypocrites, the obtuse and the blind, the bourgeois and their
supporters, deceive the people with talk about freedom in general, about equality in
general and about democracy in general. We say to the workers and peasants — tear
the mask from these liars, open the eyes of the blind. Ask them:
Is there equality of the two sexes?
Which nation is the equal of which?
Which class is the equal of which?
Freedom from what yoke or from the yoke of which class? Freedom for which
class?
He who speaks about politics, democracy and freedom, about equality, about
socialism, without posing these questions, without giving them priority, who does not
fight against hushing them up, concealing and blunting them, is the worst enemy of the
working people, a wolf in sheep’s clothing, the rabid opponent of the workers and
peasants, a lackey of the landowners, the tsars and the capitalists.
In the course of two years of Soviet power in one of the most backward countries
of Europe more has been done to emancipate woman, to make her the equal of the
“strong” sex, than has been done during the past 130 years by all the advanced,
enlightened, “democratic” republics of the world taken together.
Education, culture, civilisation, freedom — all these high-sounding words are
accompanied in all the capitalist, bourgeois republics of the world by incredibly foul,
disgustingly vile, bestially crude laws that make women unequal in marriage and divorce,
that make the child born out of wedlock and the “legally born” child unequal, and that
give privileges to the male, and humiliate and degrade womankind.
The yoke of capital, the oppression of “sacred private property”, the despotism of
philistine obtuseness, the avarice of the small property-owner — these are the things
that have prevented the most democratic bourgeois republics from abolishing these
On the Emancipation of Women

foul and filthy laws.
The Soviet Republic, the republic of workers and peasants, wiped out these laws at
one stroke and did not leave standing a single stone of the edifice of bourgeois lies and
bourgeois hypocrisy.
Down with this lie! Down with the liars who speak about freedom and equality for
all, while there is an oppressed sex, oppressing classes, private ownership of capital
and shares and people with bursting bins who use their surplus grain to enslave the
hungry. Instead of freedom for all, instead of equality for all, let there be struggle
against the oppressors and exploiters, let the opportunity to oppress and exploit be
abolished. That is our slogan!
Freedom and equality for the oppressed sex!
Freedom and equality for the workers and labouring peasants!
Struggle against the oppressors, struggle against the capitalists, struggle against the
kulak profiteers!
This is our fighting slogan, this is our proletarian truth, the truth of the fight against
capital, the truth that we hurl in the face of the world of capital with its honeyed,
hypocritical and pompous phrases about freedom and equality in general, about
freedom and equality for all.
And it is because we have laid bare this hypocrisy, because, with revolutionary
vigour, we are ensuring freedom and full rights for the oppressed and working people,
against the oppressors, against the capitalists, against the kulaks — precisely because
of this Soviet rule has become so dear to the workers of the whole world.
It is because of this, the sympathies of the working masses, the sympathies of the
oppressed and exploited in all countries of the world, are with us on this occasion of
the second anniversary of Soviet rule.
Because of this, on the occasion of the second anniversary of Soviet rule, despite
the famine and cold, despite all the suffering caused by the imperialists’ invasion of the
Russian Soviet Republic, we are fully convinced of the justness of our cause, firmly
convinced of the inevitable victory of Soviet power on a world scale.n

To the Bureau of the Women’s
Congress in Petrograd Gubernia
Comrades, since I have no opportunity of attending your Congress I should like to
send you in writing my greetings and my best wishes for success.
We are now happily ending the civil war. The Soviet Republic is becoming stronger
through its victories over the exploiters. The Soviet Republic can and must, from now
on, concentrate its forces on a more important task, one that is nearer and dearer to
us, to all working people—on a bloodless war, a war for victory over hunger, cold and
economic chaos. In this bloodless war, women workers and peasants have an especially
big role to play.
May the Women’s Congress in Petrograd Gubernia help found, consolidate and
organise an army of working women for this bloodless war which should and will
bring still greater victories to Soviet power.
With communist greetings,
V. Ulyanov (Lenin)

Written January 10, 1920.
On the Emancipation of Women

To the Working Women
Comrades, the elections to the Moscow Soviet show that the Communist Party is
gaining ground among the working class.
Working women must take a bigger part in the elections. The Soviet government
is the first and only government in the world to have completely abolished all the old,
despicable bourgeois laws which placed women in a position of inferiority to men,
which placed men in a privileged position, for example, in respect of marital rights and
of children. The Soviet government, the government of the working people, is the first
and only government in the world to have abolished all the privileges of men in
property questions, privileges which the laws on marriage and the family in all bourgeois
republics, even the most democratic, still preserve.
Wherever there are landowners, capitalists and merchants, women cannot be the
equal of men even before the law.
Where there are no landowners, capitalists or merchants, and where the
government of the working people is building a new life without these exploiters, men
and women are equal before the law.
But that is not enough.
Equality before the law is not necessarily equality in fact.
We want the working woman to be the equal of the working man not only before
the law but in actual fact. For this working women must take an increasing part in the
administration of socialised enterprises and in the administration of the state.
By taking part in administration, women will quickly learn and will catch up with
the men.
Elect more working women to the soviet, both communist women and nonparty
women. As long as they are honest working women capable of performing their work
sensibly and conscientiously, even if they are not members of the party — elect them
to the Moscow Soviet!

First published in Pravda, February 22, 1920.

To the Working Women
Send more working women to the Moscow Soviet! Let the Moscow proletariat
show that it is prepared to do everything, and is doing everything, to fight for victory,
to fight the old inequality, the old bourgeois humiliation of women!
The proletariat cannot achieve complete liberty until it has won complete liberty
for women.
N. Lenin
February 21, 1920
On the Emancipation of Women

On International Working Women’s
Day
Capitalism combines formal equality with economic and, consequently, social inequality.
That is one of the principal features of capitalism, one that is deliberately obscured by
the supporters of the bourgeoisie, the liberals, and is not understood by petty-bourgeois
democrats. This feature of capitalism, incidentally, renders it necessary for us in our
resolute fight for economic equality openly to admit capitalist inequality, and even,
under certain conditions, to make this open admission of inequality the basis of the
proletarian statehood (the Soviet constitution).
But even in the matter of formal equality (equality before the law, the “equality” of
the well-fed and the hungry man, of the man of property and the propertyless),
capitalism cannot be consistent. And one of the most glaring manifestations of this
inconsistency is the inequality of women and men. Complete equality has not been
granted even by the most progressive republican and democratic bourgeois states.
The Soviet Republic of Russia, on the other hand, at once swept away all legislative
traces of the inequality of women without exception, and immediately ensured their
complete equality before the law.
It is said that the best criterion of the cultural level is the legal status of women. This
aphorism contains a grain of profound truth. In this respect only the dictatorship of
the proletariat, only the socialist state could attain, and has attained, the highest cultural
level.
The new, mighty and unparalleled upsurge in the working women’s movement is
therefore inevitably associated with the foundation (and consolidation) of the first
Soviet Republic — and, in addition to and in connection with this, with the Communist
International.
Since mention has been made of those who were oppressed by capitalism, directly
or indirectly, in whole or in part, it must be said that the soviet system, and only the
Written March 4, 1920.

On International Working Women’s Day
soviet system, guarantees democracy. This is clearly shown by the position of the
working class and the poor peasants. It is clearly shown by the position of women.
But the soviet system is the last decisive struggle for the abolition of classes, for
economic and social equality. Democracy, even democracy for those who were
oppressed by capitalism, including the oppressed sex, is not enough for us.
The chief task of the working women’s movement is to fight for economic and
social equality, and not only formal equality, for women. The chief thing is to get
women to take part in socially productive labour, to liberate them from “domestic
slavery”, to free them from their stupefying and humiliating subjugation to the eternal
drudgery of the kitchen and the nursery.
This struggle will be a long one, and it demands a radical reconstruction both of
social technique and of morals. But it will end in the complete triumph of communism.n
On the Emancipation of Women

Message of Greetings to the AllRussia Conference of Gubernia
Departments For Work Among
Women
Telephone message
Comrades, I very much regret that I have not been able to attend your congress.
Please convey to the delegates, both men and women, my sincere greetings and wishes
for every success.
The participation of women in party and Soviet activities has acquired a gigantic
significance today, when the war has ended, and the peaceful work of organisation has
— for a long time to come, as I hope — advanced into the foreground. In this work the
women must play a leading part, and will of course do so.
V. Ulyanov (Lenin)
Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars

Sent December 6, 1920.

International Working Women’s Day
The gist of Bolshevism and the Russian October Revolution is getting into politics the
very people who were most oppressed under capitalism. They were downtrodden,
cheated and robbed by the capitalists, both under the monarchy and in the bourgeoisdemocratic republics. So long as the land and the factories were privately owned this
oppression and deceit and the plunder of the people’s labour by the capitalists were
inevitable.
The essence of Bolshevism and the Soviet power is to expose the falsehood and
mummery of bourgeois democracy, to abolish the private ownership of land and the
factories and concentrate all state power in the hands of the working and exploited
masses. They, these masses, get hold of politics, that is, of the business of building the
new society. This is no easy task: the masses are downtrodden and oppressed by
capitalism, but there is no other way — and there can be no other way — out of the
wage slavery and bondage of capitalism.
But you cannot draw the masses into politics without drawing the women into
politics as well. For the female half of the human race is doubly oppressed under
capitalism. The working woman and the peasant woman are oppressed by capital, but
over and above that, even in the most democratic of the bourgeois republics, they
remain, firstly, deprived of some rights because the law does not give them equality
with men; and secondly — and this is the main thing — they remain in “household
bondage”, they continue to be “household slaves”, for they are over-burdened with
the drudgery of the most squalid and backbreaking and stultifying toil in the kitchen
and the individual family household.
No party or revolution in the world has ever dreamed of striking so deep at the
roots of the oppression and inequality of women as the Soviet, Bolshevik revolution is
doing. Over here, in Soviet Russia, no trace is left of any inequality between men and
women under the law. The Soviet power has eliminated all there was of the especially
disgusting, base and hypocritical inequality in the laws on marriage and the family and
First published in Pravda, March 8, 1921.
On the Emancipation of Women

inequality in respect of children.
This is only the first step in the liberation of woman. But none of the bourgeois
republics, including the most democratic of them, has dared to take even this first step.
The reason is awe of “sacrosanct private property”.
The second and most important step is the abolition of the private ownership of
land and the factories. This and this alone opens up the way towards a complete and
actual emancipation of woman, her liberation from “household slavery” through the
transition from petty individual housekeeping to a large-scale socialised domestic
services.
This transition is a difficult one, because it involves the remoulding of the most
deep-rooted, inveterate, hidebound and rigid “order” (indecency and barbarity, would
be nearer the truth). But the transition has been started, the thing has been set in
motion, we have taken the new path.
And so on this international working women’s day countless meetings of working
women in all countries of the world will send greetings to Soviet Russia, which first
tackled this unparalleled and incredibly hard but great task, a task that is universally
great and truly liberatory. There will be bracing calls not to lose heart in face of the
fierce and frequently savage bourgeois reaction. The “freer” or “more democratic” a
bourgeois country is, the wilder the rampage of its gang of capitalists against the
workers’ revolution, an example of this being the democratic republic of the United
States of North America. But the mass of workers have already awakened. The dormant,
somnolent and inert masses in America, Europe and even in backward Asia were
finally roused by the imperialist war.
The ice has been broken in every corner of the world.
Nothing can stop the tide of the peoples’ liberation from the imperialist yoke and
the liberation of working men and women from the yoke of capital. This cause is being
carried forward by tens and hundreds of million working men and women in town
and countryside. That is why this cause of labour’s freedom from the yoke of capital
will triumph all over the world.
March 4, 1921

Message of Greetings to the
Conference of Representatives of
Women’s Departments of the Peoples
of Soviet Regions & Republics in the
East
I deeply regret that I am unable to attend your conference because of the pressure of
work. Please accept my heartfelt greetings and best wishes of success, particularly in
preparing for the forthcoming First All-Russia Nonparty Congress of Women of the
East, which, correctly prepared and conducted, must greatly help the cause of awakening
the women of the East and uniting them organisationally.
Lenin

First published in Pravda, April 10, 1921.
On the Emancipation of Women

From The Fourth Anniversary of the
October Revolution
What were the chief manifestations, survivals, remnants of serfdom in Russia up to
1917? The monarchy, the system of social estates, landed proprietorship and land
tenure, the inferior status of women, religion, and national oppression. Take any one
of these Augean stables, which, incidentally, were left largely uncleansed by all the
more advanced states when they accomplished their bourgeois-democratic revolutions
125, 250 and more years ago (1649 in England); take any of these Augean stables, and
you will see that we have cleansed them thoroughly. In a matter of 10 weeks, from
October 25 (November 7), 1917, to the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly (January
5, 1918), we accomplished a thousand times more in this respect than was accomplished
by the bourgeois democrats and liberals (the Cadets) and by the petty-bourgeois
democrats (the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries) during the eight months
they were in power.
Those poltroons, gasbags, vainglorious Narcissuses and petty Hamlets brandished
their wooden swords — but did not even destroy the monarchy! We cleansed out all
that monarchist muck as nobody had ever done before. We left not a stone of that
ancient edifice standing, the social-estate system (even the most advanced countries,
such as Britain, France and Germany, have not completely eliminated the survivals of
this system to this day!). We have torn out the deep-seated roots of the social-estate
system, namely, the remnants of feudalism and serfdom in the system of
landownership, to the last. “One may argue” (there are plenty of quill-drivers, Cadets,
Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries abroad to indulge in such arguments) as to
what “in the long run” will be the outcome of the agrarian reform effected by the Great
October Revolution. We have no desire at the moment to waste time on such
controversies, for we are deciding this, as well as the mass of controversies connected
with it, by struggle. But the fact cannot be denied that the petty-bourgeois democrats
First published in Pravda, October 18, 1921.

The Fourth Anniversary of the October Revolution
“compromised” with the landowners, the custodians of the traditions of serfdom, for
eight months, while we completely swept the landowners and all their traditions from
Russian soil in a few weeks.
Take religion, or the denial of rights to women, or the oppression and inequality of
the non-Russian nationalities. These are all problems of the bourgeois-democratic
revolution. The vulgar petty-bourgeois democrats talked about them for eight months.
Not in a single one of the most advanced countries in the world have these questions
been completely settled on bourgeois-democratic lines. In our country they have been
settled completely by the legislation of the October Revolution. We have fought and
are fighting religion in earnest. We have granted all the non-Russian nationalities their
own republics or autonomous regions. We in Russia no longer have the base, mean
and infamous denial of rights to women or inequality of the sexes, that disgusting
survival of feudalism and medievalism which is being renovated by the avaricious
bourgeoisie and the dull-witted and frightened petty bourgeoisie in every other country
in the world without exception.
All this goes into the content of the bourgeois-democratic revolution. A hundred
and fifty and 250 years ago the progressive leaders of that revolution (or of those
revolutions, if we consider each national variety of the one general type) promised to
rid mankind of medieval privileges, of sex inequality, of privileged state religions (or
“the idea of religion”, or “religiosity” in general) and of national inequality. They
promised, but did not keep their promises. They could not keep them, for they were
hindered by their “respect” — for the “sacred private property”. Our proletarian
revolution was not afflicted with this accursed “respect” for this thrice-accursed
medievalism and for the “sacred right of private property”.n
On the Emancipation of Women

From On the Significance Of Militant
Materialism
In conclusion, I will cite an example which has nothing to do with philosophy, but does
at any rate concern social questions, to which Pod Znamenem Marxizma41 also desires
to devote attention.
It is an example of the way in which modern pseudoscience serves in effect as a
vehicle for the grossest and most infamous reactionary views.
I was recently sent a copy of Ekonomist42 No. 1 (1922), published by the Eleventh
Department of the Russian Technical Society. The young communist who sent me this
journal (he probably had no time to acquaint himself with its contents) rashly expressed
an exceedingly sympathetic opinion of it. In reality the journal is — I do not know how
deliberately — an organ of the modern feudalists, disguised of course under a cloak of
science, democracy and so forth.
A certain Mr. P.A. Sorokin publishes in this journal an extensive, so-called
“sociological”, inquiry on “The Influence of the War”. This learned article abounds in
learned references to the “sociological” works of the author and his numerous teachers
and colleagues abroad. Here is an example of his learning.
On page 83, I read:
For every 10,000 marriages in Petrograd there are now 92.2 divorces — a fantastic
figure. Of every 100 annulled marriages. 51.1 had lasted less than one year, l l% less
than one month, 22% an two months, 41% less than three to six months and only 26%
over six months. These figures show that modern legal marriage is a form which
conceals what is in effect extraconjugal sexual intercourse, enabling lovers of
“strawberries” to satisfy their appetites in a “legal’ way”. (Ekonomist, No. 1, p. 83)

Both this gentleman and the Russian Technical Society which publishes this journal
and gives space to this kind of argument no doubt regard themselves as adherents of
democracy and would consider it a great insult to be called what they are in fact,
First published in Pod Znamenem Marxizma, March 1922.

On the Significance Of Militant Materialism
namely, feudalists, reactionaries, “diploma’d flunkeys of clericalism”.
Even the slightest acquaintance with the legislation of bourgeois countries on marriage,
divorce and children born out of wedlock, and with the actual state of affairs in this
respect, is enough to show anyone interested in the subject that modern bourgeois
democracy, even in all the most democratic bourgeois republics, exhibits a truly feudal
attitude in this respect towards women and towards children born out of wedlock.
This, of course, does not prevent the Mensheviks, the Socialist-Revolutionaries, a part
of the anarchists and all the similar parties in the West from shouting about democracy
and how it is being violated by the Bolsheviks. But as a matter of fact the Bolshevik
revolution is the only consistently democratic revolution in respect to such questions as
marriage, divorce and the position of children born out of wedlock. And this is a question
which in a most direct manner affects the interests of more than half the population of any
country. The Bolshevik revolution, in spite of the vast number of bourgeois revolutions
which preceded it and which called themselves democratic, was the first and only revolution
to wage a resolute struggle in this respect both against reaction and feudalism and against
the usual hypocrisy of the ruling and propertied classes.
If 92 divorces for every 10,000 marriages seem to Mr. Sorokin a fantastic figure,
one can only suppose that either the author lived and was brought up in a monastery
so entirely walled-off from life that hardly anyone will believe such a monastery ever
existed, or that he is distorting the truth in the interest of reaction and the bourgeoisie.
Anybody who has some slight acquaintance with social conditions in bourgeois
countries knows that the real number of actual divorces (of course, not sanctioned by
church and law) is everywhere immeasurably greater.
The only difference between Russia and other countries in this respect is that our
laws do not sanctify hypocrisy and the debasement of the woman and her child, but
openly and in the name of the government declare systematic war on all hypocrisy and
all debasement.
The Marxist magazine will have to wage war also on these modern “educated”
feudalists. Not a few of them, very likely, are in receipt of government money and are
employed by our government to educate our youth, although they are no more fitted
for this than notorious perverters are fitted for the post of superintendents of
educational establishments for the young.
The working class of Russia has succeeded in winning power; but it has not yet
learned to utilise it, for otherwise it would have long ago very politely dispatched such
teachers and members of learned societies to countries with a bourgeois “democracy”.
That is the proper place for such feudalists.
But it will learn, given the will to learn.n
On the Emancipation of Women

To the Nonparty Conference of Factory
& Peasant Women of Moscow City &
Moscow Gubernia43
Dear Comrades,
I thank you cordially for your kind wishes and greetings. I am very sorry that I am
unable to attend in person. Congratulations on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of
the revolution and all best wishes for the success of your conference.
Yours,
Lenin

Written November 6, 1922.

Appendix 1

From The Program of the
Communist Party of Russia44
Bourgeois democracy has repeatedly proclaimed the equality of individuals
independently of sex, race, religion, and nationality; but capitalism has nowhere been
able to realise this equality of rights in practice, and in its imperialistic phase it has
brought about an extreme intensification of racial and national oppression. Simply for
the reason that the Soviet power is the workers’ power, it has been able completely
and in all spheres of life to effect for the first time in the world the entire abolition of
the last traces of the inequality of women in the spheres of conjugal and family rights.
At the present moment, it is the task of our party to labour in the field of ideas and in
the field of education pre-eminently to this end, that it may effect the final destruction
of all traces of former inequality and prejudice, especially among the backward strata
of the proletariat and the peasantry.
Not content to proclaim a formal equality of rights for women, the party endeavours
to free them from the material burdens of the old domestic economy by substituting
for that economy communal housing, communal dining rooms, central wash houses,
creches, etc.n

Adopted by the Eighth Party Congress, March 18-23, 1919.
On the Emancipation of Women

Appendix 2

From The ABC of Communism
By Nikolai Bukharin & Evgeny Preobrazhensky

The equality of the workers, irrespective of sex, creed, &
race
Bourgeois democracy proclaims in words a whole series of freedoms, but from the
oppressed these freedoms are safeguarded by five locks and seven seals. Among other
things, bourgeois democracy has often declared that people are equal irrespective of
sex, creed, race, and nationality. Proudly has the pledge been given that under the
bourgeois democratic system all are equals: women and men; whites, yellows, and
blacks; Europeans and Asiatics; Buddhists, Christians, and Jews. In reality, the
bourgeoisie has failed to carry out these pledges. During the imperialist epoch, there
has been all over the world a terrible increase in racial and national oppression. (For
details see the next chapter.) But even as concerns women, bourgeois democracy is far
from having realised equality. Woman has remained a being without rights, a domestic
animal, part of the furniture of the marital couch.
The working woman in capitalist society is peculiarly oppressed, peculiarly deprived
of rights. In all matters she has even less than the beggarly rights which the bourgeoisie
grants to the working man. The right to the parliamentary vote has been conceded in
a few countries only. As regards the right of inheritance, woman everywhere receives
the beggar’s portion. In family life she is always subject to her husband, and everything
that goes wrong is considered to be her fault. In a word, bourgeois democracy
everywhere exhibits as regards women laws and customs which strongly remind us of
the customs of savages, who exchange, buy, punish, or steal women just as if they were
chattels, dolls, or beasts of burden. Our Russian proverb runs, “A hen is not a bird, and
a woman is not a person”; here we have the valuation of a slave society. This state of
The ABC of Communism was written in 1919; it was subtitled “A Popular Explanation of the
Program of the Communist Party of Russia”.

The ABC of Communism
affairs is extremely disadvantageous to the proletariat. There are more women than
men amongst the workers. It is obvious that the struggle of the proletariat must be
greatly hindered by the lack of equality between the two halves of which it is composed.
Without the aid of the women of the proletariat, it is idle to dream of a general victory,
it is idle to dream of the “freeing of labour”. For this reason, it is greatly to the interest
of the working class that there should be complete fighting comradeship between the
female and the male portions of the proletariat, and that this comradeship should be
strengthened by equality. The Soviet power is the first to have realised such equality in
all departments of life: in marriage, in the family, in political affairs, etc. In all things,
throughout Soviet Russia, women are the equals of men.
It is incumbent upon our party to effect the realisation of this equality in actual life.
Before all, we must make it clear to the broad masses of the workers that the subjection
of women is extremely harmful to them. Hitherto among the workers it has been
customary to look upon women as inferiors; as for the peasants, they smile when a
“mere woman” begins to take an interest in social affairs. In the Soviet Republic the
working woman has exactly the same rights as the working man; she can elect to the
soviets and be elected to them; she can hold any commissar’s office; can do any kind of
work in the army, in economic life, and in the state administration.
But in Russia, working women are far more backward than working men. Many
people look down upon them. In this matter persevering efforts are needed: among
men, that they may cease blocking women’s road; among women, that they may learn
to make a full use of their rights, may cease to be timid or diffident.
We must not forget that “every cook has to be taught to take her share in
governmental administration”. We have learned above that the really important matter
is not the right that is written on paper, but the possibility of realising a right in practice.
How can a working woman effectively realise her rights when she has to devote so
much time to housekeeping, must go to the market and wait her turn there, must do
the family washing, must look after her children, must bear the heavy burden of all this
domestic drudgery?
The aim of the Soviet Republic and of our party must be, to deliver working
women from such slavery, to free the working woman from these obsolete and
antediluvian conditions. The organisation of house communes (not places in which
people will wrangle, but places in which they will live like human beings) with central
wash-houses; the organisation of communal kitchens; the organisation of communal
nurseries, kindergartens, playgrounds, summer colonies for children, schools with
communal dining rooms, etc. — such are the things which will enfranchise woman,
and will make it possible for her to interest herself in all those matters which now
On the Emancipation of Women

interest the proletarian man.
In an era of devastation and famine, it is, of course, difficult to do all these things as
they ought to be done. Nevertheless, our party must in this manner do its utmost to
attract the working woman to play her part in the common task.n

Appendix 3

From My Recollections of Lenin
By Clara Zetkin
Comrade Lenin repeatedly discussed with me the problem of women’s rights. He
obviously attached great importance to the women’s movement, which was to him an
essential component of the mass movement that in certain circumstances might become
decisive. Needless to say he saw full social equality of women as a principle which no
communist could dispute.
We had our first lengthy talk on this subject in the autumn of 1920, in Lenin’s big
study in the Kremlin. Lenin sat at his desk, which was covered with books and papers,
indicating study and work without the “brilliant disorder” associated with genius.
“We must by all means set up a powerful international women’s movement on a
clear-cut theoretical basis”, he began after greeting me. “It is clear that without Marxist
theory we cannot have proper practice. Here, too, we communists need the greatest
clarity of principle. We must draw a sharp line between us and all other parties. Our
Second International Congress46 unfortunately did not come up to expectations in
discussing the question of women. It posed the question but did not get around to
taking a definite stand. A committee is still in charge of the matter. It is to draft a
resolution, theses and directives but has made little progress so far. You must help it.”
I had already heard from others what Lenin was now telling me and I expressed
my amazement. I was full of enthusiasm for everything Russian women had done
during the revolution and what they were doing now for its defence and further
development. As for the standing and activity of women in the Bolshevik Party, I
thought that it was a model party — indeed, the model party. It alone supplied the
international communist women’s movement with a valuable trained and experienced
force and set a great example for history.
“That is true, it’s wonderful”, Lenin remarked with a faint smile. “In Petrograd,
First published 1925.
On the Emancipation of Women

here in Moscow, and in other cities and industrial centres, proletarian women showed
up splendidly during the revolution. We would not have won without them, or hardly.
That is my opinion. What courage they showed and how courageous they still are!
Imagine the suffering and privation they are enduring. But they are holding out because
they want to defend the soviets, because they want freedom and communism. Yes,
our working women are magnificent class fighters. They are worthy of admiration and
love. In general, it must be acknowledged that even the ladies of the ‘Constitutional
Democrats’ in Petrograd showed greater courage in fighting us than those wretched
military Cadets.47
“It’s true that we have reliable, intelligent and tireless women in our party. They
hold important posts in the soviets, executive committees, people’s commissariats,
and public offices of every kind. Many of them work day and night either in the party
or among the workers and peasants or in the Red Army. That is of great value to us. It
is important for women all over the world, as it is evidence of the capacity of women,
of the great value of the work they do for society. The first proletarian dictatorship is
truly paving the way for the complete social equality of women. It eradicates more
prejudice than volumes of feminist literature. However, in spite of all this, we do not
yet have an international communist women’s movement and we must have one
without fail. We must immediately set about starting it. Without such a movement,
the work of our International and of its parties is incomplete and never will be complete.
Yet our revolutionary work has to be fulfilled in its entirety. Tell me how communist
work is getting on abroad.”
I did as well as I could at the time, with the links between the Comintern parties still
very loose and irregular. Lenin listened attentively, leaning slightly forward, with no
sign of boredom, impatience or fatigue, keenly following even details of secondary
importance. I have never known anyone who was a better listener or who could
coordinate and generalise all that he had heard as fast as he did. That was evident from
the short and always very specific questions he asked from time to time about what I
told him, and from the fact that he returned to this or that particular of my narrative
later on. Lenin made some brief notes.
Naturally, I spoke in great detail about the state of affairs in Germany. I told Lenin
of the vast importance which Rosa Luxemburg attached to drawing the greatest number
of women into the revolutionary struggle. When the Communist Party had been
founded, she insisted that a women’s newspaper be published. When Leo Jogiches
and I met for the last time — 36 hours before he was murdered — he discussed the
party’s plan of work with me. He gave me various tasks to perform, among them a
plan for the organisation of work among working women. The party tackled this

My Recollections of Lenin
question at its first illegal conference. The trained and experienced women agitators
and leaders who had become prominent before and during the war had almost without
exception remained social-democrats of the one or the other shade, and kept the
agitated and active proletarian women under their sway. However, there was already
a small nucleus of energetic, devoted women who took part in the party’s every job
and every battle. Furthermore, the party itself had already organised methodical activity
among the working women. Of course all this was merely a start, but a good start
nevertheless.
“Not bad, not bad at all”, Lenin said. “The communist women’s energy, devotion
and enthusiasm, their courage and intelligence during the illegal and semi-legal periods,
promise well for the development of our work. It would be useful for the expansion of
the party and the growth of its strength to win over the masses and carry through
actions. But how about giving all the comrades a clear understanding of the
fundamentals of this question and training them — how are you getting along in this
respect? This is what counts most in the work among the masses. It is very important
in terms of the ideas we convey to the masses, and of the things we want the masses to
adopt and take inspiration from. I cannot remember at the moment who said ‘It takes
inspiration to do great deeds’. We and the working people of the whole world still have
really great deeds to perform. What inspires your comrades, the proletarian women
of Germany? What about their proletarian class-consciousness? Do their interests
and activities centre on the political demands of the moment? What is the focal point
of their thoughts?
“I have heard strange things about that from Russian and German comrades. I
must tell you what I mean. I understand that in Hamburg a gifted communist woman
is bringing out a newspaper for prostitutes, and is trying to organise them for the
revolutionary struggle. Now Rosa, a true communist, felt and acted like a human being
when she wrote an article in defence of prostitutes who have landed in jail for violating
a police regulation concerning their sad trade. They are unfortunate double victims of
bourgeois society. Victims, first, of its accursed system of property and, secondly, of its
accursed moral hypocrisy. There’s no doubt about this. Only a coarse-grained and
short-sighted person could forget this. To understand this is one thing, but it is quite
another thing — how shall I put it? — to organise the prostitutes as a special revolutionary
guild contingent and publish a trade union paper for them. Are there really no industrial
working women left in Germany who need organising, who need a newspaper, who
should be enlisted in your struggle? This is a morbid deviation. It strongly reminds me
of the literary vogue which made a sweet madonna out of every prostitute. Its origin
was sound too: social sympathy, and indignation against the moral hypocrisy of the
On the Emancipation of Women

honourable bourgeoisie. But the healthy principle underwent bourgeois corrosion
and degenerated. The question of prostitution will confront us even in our country
with many a difficult problem. Return the prostitute to productive work, find her a
place in the social economy — that is the thing to do. But the present state of our
economy and all the other circumstances make it a difficult and complicated matter.
Here you have an aspect of the woman problem which faces us in all its magnitude,
after the proletariat has come to power, and demands a practical solution. It will still
require a great deal of effort here in Soviet Russia. But to return to your special
problem in Germany. Under no circumstances should the party look calmly upon
such improper acts of its members. It causes confusion and splits our forces. Now
what have you done to stop it?”
Before I could answer Lenin continued:
“The record of your sins, Clara, is even worse. I have been told that at the evenings
arranged for reading and discussion with working women, sex and marriage problems
come first. They are said to be the main objects of interest in your political instruction
and educational work. I could not believe my ears when I heard that. The first state of
proletarian dictatorship is battling with the counter-revolutionaries of the whole world.
The situation in Germany itself calls for the greatest unity of all proletarian revolutionary
forces, so that they can repel the counter-revolution which is pushing on. But active
communist women are busy discussing sex problems and the forms of marriage —
‘past, present and future’. They consider it their most important task to enlighten
working women on these questions. It is said that a pamphlet on the sex question
written by a communist authoress from Vienna enjoys the greatest popularity. What
rot that booklet is! The workers read what is right in it long ago in Bebel. Only not in
the tedious, cut-and-dried form found in the pamphlet but in the form of gripping
agitation that strikes out at bourgeois society. The mention of Freud’s hypotheses is
designed to give the pamphlet a scientific veneer, but it is so much bungling by an
amateur. Freud’s theory has now become a fad. I mistrust sex theories expounded in
articles, treatises, pamphlets, etc. — in short, the theories dealt with in that specific
literature which sprouts so luxuriantly on the dung heap of bourgeois society. I mistrust
those who are always absorbed in the sex problems, the way an Indian saint is absorbed
in the contemplation of his navel. It seems to me that this superabundance of sex
theories, which for the most part are mere hypotheses, and often quite arbitrary ones,
stems from a personal need. It springs from the desire to justify one’s own abnormal
or excessive sex life before bourgeois morality and to plead for tolerance towards
oneself. This veiled respect for bourgeois morality is as repugnant to me as rooting
about in all that bears on sex. No matter how rebellious and revolutionary it may be

My Recollections of Lenin
made to appear, it is in the final analysis thoroughly bourgeois. Intellectuals and others
like them are particularly keen on this. There is no room for it in the party, among the
class-conscious, fighting proletariat.”
I interposed that where private property and the bourgeois social order prevail,
questions of sex and marriage gave rise to manifold problems, conflicts and suffering
for women of all social classes and strata. As far as women are concerned, the war and
its consequences exacerbated the existing conflicts and suffering to the utmost precisely
in the sphere of sexual relations. Problems formerly concealed from women were
now laid bare. To this was added the atmosphere of incipient revolution. The world of
old emotions and thoughts was cracking up. Former social connections were loosening
and breaking. The makings of new relations between people were appearing. Interest
in the relevant problems was an expression of the need for enlightenment and a new
orientation. It was also a reaction against the distortions and hypocrisy of bourgeois
society. Knowledge of the modifications of the forms of marriage and family that took
place in the course of history, and of their dependence on economics, would serve to
rid the minds of working women of their preconceived idea of the eternity of bourgeois
society. The critically historical attitude to this had to lead to an unrelenting analysis of
bourgeois society, an exposure of its essence and its consequences, including the
branding of false sex morality. All roads led to Rome. Every truly Marxist analysis of
an important part of the ideological superstructure of society, of an outstanding social
phenomenon, had to lead to an analysis of bourgeois society and its foundation,
private property. It should lead to the conclusion that “Carthage must be destroyed”.
Lenin nodded with a smile.
“There you are! You defend your comrades and your party like a lawyer. What
you say is of course true. But that can at best excuse, not justify, the mistake made in
Germany. It remains a mistake. Can you assure me in all sincerity that during those
reading and discussion evenings, questions of sex and marriage are dealt with from
the point of view of mature, vital historical materialism? This presupposes wideranging, profound knowledge, and the fullest Marxist mastery of a vast amount of
material. Do you now have the forces you need for that? Had you had them, a pamphlet
like the one we spoke about would not have been used for instruction during reading
and discussion evenings. It is being recommended and disseminated instead of being
criticised. Why is the approach to this problem inadequate and un-Marxist? Because
sex and marriage problems are not treated as only part of the main social problem.
Conversely, the main social problem is presented as a part, an appendage to the sex
problem. The important point recedes into the background. Thus not only is this
question obscured, but also thought, and the class-consciousness of working women
On the Emancipation of Women

in general, is dulled.
“Besides, and this isn’t the least important point, Solomon the Wise said there is a
time for everything. I ask you, is this the time to keep working women busy for months
at a stretch with such questions as how to love or be loved, how to woo or be wooed?
This, of course, with regard to the ‘past, present and future’, and among the various
races. And it is proudly styled historical materialism. Nowadays all the thoughts of
communist women, of working women, should be centred on the proletarian
revolution, which will lay the foundation, among other things, for the necessary revision
of material and sexual relations. Just now we must really give priority to problems
other than the forms of marriage prevalent among Australia’s aborigines, or marriage
between brother and sister in ancient times. For the German proletariat, the problem
of the soviets, of the Versailles Treaty and its impact on the lives of women, the
problem of unemployment, of falling wages, of taxes and many other things remain
the order of the day. To be brief, I am still of the opinion that this sort of political and
social education of working women is wrong, absolutely wrong. How could you keep
quiet about it? You should have set your authority against it.”
I told my fervent friend that I had never failed to criticise and to remonstrate with
the leading women comrades in various places. But, as he knew, no prophet is honoured
in his own country or in his own house. By my criticism I had drawn upon myself the
suspicion that “survivals of a social-democratic attitude and old-fashioned philistinism
were still strong” in my mind. However, in the end my criticism had proved effective.
Sex and marriage were no longer the focal point in lectures at discussion evenings.
Lenin resumed the thread of his argument.
“Yes, yes, I know that,” he said. “Many people rather suspect me of philistinism on
this account, although such an attitude is repugnant to me — it conceals so much
narrow-mindedness and hypocrisy. Well, I’m unruffled by it. Yellow-beaked fledgelings
newly hatched from their bourgeois-tainted eggs are all so terribly clever. We have to
put up with that without mending our ways. The youth movement is also affected with
the modern approach to the sex problem and with excessive interest in it.”
Lenin emphasised the word “modern” with an ironical, deprecating gesture.
“I was also told that sex problems are a favourite subject in your youth organisations
too, and that there are hardly enough lecturers on this subject. This nonsense is
especially dangerous and damaging to the youth movement. It can easily lead to sexual
excesses, to overstimulation of sex life and to wasted health and strength of young
people. You must fight that too. There is no lack of contact between the youth
movement and the women’s movement. Our communist women everywhere should
cooperate methodically with young people. This will be a continuation of motherhood,

My Recollections of Lenin
will elevate it and extend it from the individual to the social sphere. Women’s incipient
social life and activities must be promoted, so that they can outgrow the narrowness of
their philistine, individualistic psychology centred on home and family. But this is
incidental.
“In our country, too, considerable numbers of young people are busy ‘revising
bourgeois conceptions and morals’ in the sex question. And let me add that this
involves a considerable section of our best boys and girls, of our truly promising
youth. It is as you have just said. In the atmosphere created by the aftermath of war
and by the revolution which has begun, old ideological values, finding themselves in a
society whose economic foundations are undergoing a radical change, perish, and lose
their restraining force. New values crystallise slowly, in the struggle. With regard to
relations between people, and between man and woman, feelings and thoughts are
also becoming revolutionised. New boundaries are being drawn between the rights of
the individual and those of the community, and hence also the duties of the individual.
Things are still in complete, chaotic ferment. The direction and potentiality of the
various contradictory tendencies can still not be seen clearly enough. It is a slow and
often very painful process of passing away and coming into being. All this applies also
to the field of sexual relations, marriage, and the family. The decay, putrescence, and
filth of bourgeois marriage with its difficult dissolution, its licence for the husband and
bondage for the wife, and its disgustingly false sex morality and relations fill the best
and most spiritually active of people with the utmost loathing.
“The coercion of bourgeois marriage and bourgeois legislation on the family
enhance the evil and aggravate the conflicts. It is the coercion of ‘sacrosanct’ property.
It sanctifies venality, baseness, and dirt. The conventional hypocrisy of ‘respectable’
bourgeois society takes care of the rest. People revolt against the prevailing
abominations and perversions. And at a time when mighty nations are being destroyed,
when the former power relations are being disrupted, when a whole social world is
beginning to decline, the sensations of the individual undergo a rapid change. A
stimulating thirst for different forms of enjoyment easily acquires an irresistible force.
Sexual and marriage reforms in the bourgeois sense will not do. In the sphere of sexual
relations and marriage, a revolution is approaching — in keeping with the proletarian
revolution. Of course, women and young people are taking a deep interest in the
complex tangle of problems which have arisen as a result of this. Both the former and
the latter suffer greatly from the present messy state of sex relations. Young people
rebel against them with the vehemence of their years. This is only natural. Nothing
could be falser than to preach monastic self-denial and the sanctity of the filthy bourgeois
morals to young people. However, it is hardly a good thing that sex, already strongly
On the Emancipation of Women

felt in the physical sense, should at such a time assume so much prominence in the
psychology of young people. The consequences are nothing short of fatal. Ask Comrade
Lilina about it. She ought to have had many experiences in her extensive work at
educational institutions of various kinds and you know that she is a communist through
and through, and has no prejudices.
“Youth’s altered attitude to questions of sex is of course ‘fundamental’, and based
on theory. Many people call it ‘revolutionary’ and ‘communist’. They sincerely believe
that this is so. I am an old man, and I do not like it. I may be a morose ascetic, but quite
often this so-called ‘new sex life’ of young people — and frequently of the adults too —
seems to me purely bourgeois and simply an extension of the good old bourgeois
brothel. All this has nothing in common with free love as we communists understand
it. No doubt you have heard about the famous theory that in communist society
satisfying sexual desire and the craving for love is as simple and trivial as ‘drinking a
glass of water’. A section of our youth has gone mad, absolutely mad, over this ‘glassof-water theory’. It has been fatal to many a young boy and girl. Its devotees assert
that it is a Marxist theory. I want no part of the kind of Marxism which infers all
phenomena and all changes in the ideological superstructure of society directly and
blandly from its economic basis, for things are not as simple as all that. A certain
Frederick Engels has established this a long time ago with regard to historical
materialism.
“I consider the famous ‘glass-of-water’ theory as completely un-Marxist and,
moreover, as antisocial. It is not only what nature has given but also what has become
culture, whether of a high or low level, that comes into play in sexual life. Engels
pointed out in his Origin of the Family how significant it was that the common sexual
relations had developed into individual sex love and thus became purer. The relations
between the sexes are not simply the expression of a mutual influence between
economics and a physical want deliberately singled out for physiological examination.
It would be rationalism and not Marxism to attempt to refer the change in these
relations directly to the economic basis of society in isolation from its connection with
the ideology as a whole. To be sure, thirst has to be quenched. But would a normal
person normally lie down in the gutter and drink from a puddle? Or even from a glass
whose edge has been greased by many lips? But the social aspect is more important
than anything else. The drinking of water is really an individual matter. But it takes two
people to make love, and a third person, a new life, is likely to come into being. This
deed has a social complexion and constitutes a duty to the community.
“As a communist I have no liking at all for the ‘glass-of-water’ theory, despite its
attractive label: ‘emancipation of love’. Besides, emancipation of love is neither a novel

My Recollections of Lenin
nor a communistic idea. You will recall that it was advanced in fine literature around
the middle of the past century as ‘emancipation of the heart’. In bourgeois practice it
materialised into emancipation of the flesh. It was preached with greater talent than
now, though I cannot judge how it was practised. Not that I want my criticism to breed
asceticism. That is farthest from my thoughts. Communism should not bring
asceticism, but joy and strength, stemming, among other things, from a consummate
love life. Whereas today, in my opinion, the obtaining plethora of sex life yields neither
joy nor strength. On the contrary, it impairs them. This is bad, very bad, indeed, in the
epoch of revolution.
“Young people are particularly in need of joy and strength. Healthy sports, such as
gymnastics, swimming, hiking, physical exercises of every description and a wide range
of intellectual interests is what they need, as well as learning, study and research, and
as far as possible collectively. This will be far more useful to young people than endless
lectures and discussions on sex problems and the so-called living by one’s nature.
Mens sana in corpore sano. Be neither monk nor Don Juan, but not anything in between
either, like a German philistine. You know the young comrade X. He is a splendid lad,
and highly gifted. For all that, I am afraid that he will never amount to anything. He has
one love affair after another. This is not good for the political struggle and for the
revolution. I will not vouch for the reliability or the endurance of women whose love
affair is intertwined with politics, or for the men who run after every petticoat and let
themselves in with every young female. No, no, that does not go well with revolution.”
Lenin sprang to his feet, slapped the table with his hand and paced up and down
the room.
“The revolution calls for concentration and rallying of every nerve by the masses
and by the individual. It does not tolerate orgiastic conditions so common among
d’Annunzio’s decadent heroes and heroines. Promiscuity in sexual matters is bourgeois.
It is a sign of degeneration. The proletariat is a rising class. It does not need an intoxicant
to stupefy or stimulate it, neither the intoxicant of sexual laxity or of alcohol. It should
and will not forget the vileness, the filth and the barbarity of capitalism. It derives its
strongest inspiration to fight from its class position, from the communist ideal. What
it needs is clarity, clarity, and more clarity. Therefore, I repeat, there must be no
weakening, no waste and no dissipation of energy. Self-control and self-discipline are
not slavery; not in matters of love either. But excuse me, Clara, I have strayed far from
the point which we set out to discuss. Why have you not called me to order? Worry has
set me talking. I take the future of our youth very close to heart. It is part and parcel of
the revolution. Whenever harmful elements appear, which creep from bourgeois
society to the world of the revolution and spread like the roots of prolific weeds, it is
On the Emancipation of Women

better to take action against them quickly. The questions we have dealt with are also
part of the women’s problems.”
Lenin spoke with great animation and deep persuasion. I could feel that his every
word came from the heart, and the expression on his face added to this feeling. From
time to time he punctuated some idea with energetic gestures. I was astonished to see
how much attention he devoted to trivial matters and how familiar he was with them,
side by side with highly important political problems. And not only as concerned
Soviet Russia, but also the still capitalist countries. Splendid Marxist that he was, he
grasped the particular wherever and in whatever form it revealed itself, in its relation
to, and its bearing upon, the whole. All his zest and purpose was concentrated with
unshakeable singleness, like irresistible forces of nature, upon the one goal of speeding
the revolution as a work of the masses. He evaluated everything in terms of its effect
on the conscious motive forces of the revolution, both national and international, for
while he evaluated the historically conditioned features of the individual countries and
their different stages of development, he always had his eyes on the indivisible worldwide
proletarian revolution.
“Comrade Lenin, how I regret”, I exclaimed, “that your words have not been
heard by hundreds and thousands of people. As you know, you do not have to convert
me. But how important it would be for friend and foe to hear your opinion!”
Lenin smiled amiably.
“I may speak or write some day on the questions we have discussed. But later, not
now. Now all our time and strength must be concentrated on other things. There are
bigger and more difficult jobs to do. The struggle to maintain and strengthen the
Soviet state is not yet over by any means. We have to digest the outcome of the Polish
War48 and to make the most we can of it. Wrangel is still hanging on in the South. It is
true, I am deeply convinced that we shall cope with him. That will give the British and
French imperialists and their small vassals something to think about. But the most
difficult part of our task, reconstruction, is still ahead. That will also bring the problems
of sex relations, marriage and the family to the foreground. In the meantime, you will
have to handle it as best you can where and when it is necessary. You should not allow
these questions to be handled in an un-Marxist way or to serve as the basis for
disruptive deviations and intrigues. Now at last I come to your work.”
Lenin consulted his watch.
“Half of the time I have at my disposal for you”, he said, “has already expired. I
have chatted too long. You are to work out the leading theses on communist work
among women. I know your principled approach and practical experience. So our talk
about this will be brief; you had better get busy. What do you think the theses should

My Recollections of Lenin
be?”
I gave him a concise account on this score. Lenin nodded approvingly a few times
without interrupting. When I was through I looked at him questioningly.
“Right”, he remarked. “It would also be a good thing if you were to inform a
meeting of responsible women party comrades about it and to discuss it with them.
Too bad Comrade Inessa [Armand] is not here. She is sick and has gone to the Caucasus.
Put the theses in writing after the discussion. A committee will look them over and the
Executive Committee will make the final decision. I give my opinion on only some of
the main points, on which I fully share your views. They seem important to me also for
our present agitation and propaganda work if it is to pave the way for action, for
successful fighting.
“The theses must emphasise strongly that true emancipation of women is not
possible except through communism. You must lay stress on the unbreakable
connection between woman’s human and social position and the private ownership of
the means of production. This will draw a strong, ineradicable line against the bourgeois
movement for the ‘emancipation of women’. This will also give us a basis for examining
the woman question as part of the social, working-class question, and to bind it firmly
with the proletarian class struggle and the revolution. The communist women’s
movement itself must be a mass movement, a part of the general mass movements;
and not only of the proletarians, but of all the exploited and oppressed, of all victims
of capitalism or of the dominant class. Therein, too, lies the significance of the women’s
movement for the class struggle of the proletariat and its historic mission, the creation
of a communist society. We can be legitimately proud that we have the flower of
revolutionary womanhood in our party, in the Comintern. But this is not decisive, we
have to win over the millions of working women in town and country for our struggle
and, particularly, for the communist reconstruction of society. There can be no real
mass movement without the women.
“We derive our organisational ideas from our ideological conceptions. We want
no separate organisations of communist women! She who is a communist belongs as
a member to the party, just as he who is a communist. They have the same rights and
duties. There can be no difference of opinion on that score. However, we must not
shut our eyes to the facts. The party must have organs — working groups, commissions,
committees, sections or whatever else they may be called — with the specific purpose
of rousing the broad masses of women, bringing them into contact with the party and
keeping them under its influence. This naturally requires that we carry on systematic
work among the women. We must teach the awakened women, win them over for the
proletarian class struggle under the leadership of the Communist Party, and equip
On the Emancipation of Women

them for it. When I say this I have in mind not only proletarian women, whether they
work in mills or cook the family meal. I also have in mind the peasant women and the
women of the various sections of the lower middle class. They, too, are victims of
capitalism, and more than ever since the war. The lack of interest in politics and the
otherwise antisocial and backward psychology of these masses of women, the narrow
scope of their activities and the whole pattern of their lives are undeniable facts. It
would be silly to ignore them, absolutely silly. We must have our own groups to work
among them, special methods of agitation, and special forms of organisation. This is
not bourgeois ‘feminism’; it is a practical revolutionary expediency.”
I told Lenin that his arguments were a valuable encouragement for me. Many
comrades, very good ones, too, vehemently opposed the party’s setting up special
groups for planned work among women. They denounced it as a return to the notorious
“emancipation of women” movement, to social-democratic traditions. They claimed
that since the communist parties gave equality to women they should, consequently,
carry on work without differentiation among all the working people in general. The
approach to men and to women should be the same. Any attempt to consider the
circumstances which Lenin had noted concerning agitation and organisation would be
branded by the exponents of this view as opportunism, as renunciation and betrayal
of fundamental principles.
“This is not new and not conclusive”, Lenin said. “Do not let it mislead you. Why
are there nowhere as many women in the party as men, not even in Soviet Russia?
Why is the number of women in the trade unions so small? These facts give one food
for thought. Denial of the indispensable special groups for work among the masses of
women is part of the very principled, very radical attitude of our dear friends of the
Communist Workers’ Party. They are of the opinion that only one form of organisation
should exist — a workers’ union. I know about it. Principles are invoked by many
revolutionary-minded but confused people whenever there is a lack of understanding,
i.e., whenever the mind refuses to grasp the obvious facts that ought to be heeded.
How do such guardians of ‘the purity of principles’ cope with the historical necessities
of our revolutionary policy? All their talk collapses in face of the inexorable necessities.
We cannot exercise the dictatorship of the proletariat without having millions of women
on our side. Nor can we engage in communist construction without them. We must
find a way to reach them. We must study and search in order to find this way.
“It is therefore perfectly right for us to put forward demands for the benefit of
women. This is not a minimum program, nor a program of reform in the socialdemocratic sense, in the sense of the Second International. It does not go to show that
we believe the bourgeoisie and its state will last forever, or even for a long time. Nor is

My Recollections of Lenin
it an attempt to pacify the masses of women with reforms and to divert them from the
path of revolutionary struggle. It is nothing of the sort, and not any sort of reformist
humbug either. Our demands are no more than practical conclusions, drawn by us
from the crying needs and disgraceful humiliations that weak and underprivileged
woman must bear under the bourgeois system. We demonstrate thereby that we are
aware of these needs and of the oppression of women, that we are conscious of the
privileged position of the men, and that we hate — yes, hate — and want to remove
whatever oppresses and harasses the working woman, the wife of the worker, the
peasant woman, the wife of the little man, and even in many respects the woman of
the propertied classes. The rights and social measures we demand of bourgeois society
for women are proof that we understand the position and interests of women and that
we will take note of them under the proletarian dictatorship. Naturally, not as soporific
and patronising reformists. No, by no means. But as revolutionaries who call upon the
women to take a hand as equals in the reconstruction of the economy and of the
ideological superstructure.”
I assured Lenin that I was of the same opinion, but that it would no doubt be
opposed. Uncertain and timid minds would reject it as suspicious opportunism. Nor
could it be denied that our present demands for women might be incorrectly
understood and interpreted.
“What of it?” Lenin exclaimed, somewhat annoyed. “This risk exists in everything
we say and do. If we are going to let fear of this stop us from doing the advisable and
necessary, we might as well turn into Indian stylites. We mustn’t budge, we mustn’t
budge on any account, or we shall tumble from the lofty pillar of our principles! In our
case it is not only a matter of what we demand, but also of how we demand. I believe
I have made that sufficiently clear. It stands to reason that in our propaganda we must
not make a fetish out of our demands for women. No, we must fight now for these and
now for other demands, depending on the existing conditions, and naturally always in
association with the general interests of’ the proletariat.
“Every tussle of this kind sets us at loggerheads with the respectable bourgeois
clique and its no less respectable reformist lackeys. This compels the latter either to
fight under our leadership — which they do not want — or to drop their disguise.
Thus, the struggle fences us off from them and shows our communist face. It wins us
the confidence of the mass of women, who feel themselves exploited, enslaved and
crushed by the domination of the man, by the power of their employers and by
bourgeois society as a whole. Betrayed and abandoned by all, working women come
to realise that they must fight together with us. Must I avow, or make you avow, that
the struggle for women’s rights must also be linked with our principal aim — the
On the Emancipation of Women

conquest of power and the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat? At
present, this is, and will continue to be, our alpha and omega. That is clear, absolutely
clear. But the broad masses of working women will not feel irresistibly drawn to the
struggle for state power if we harp on just this one demand, even though we may blare
it forth on the trumpets of Jericho. No, a thousand times no! We must combine our
appeal politically in the minds of the female masses with the sufferings, the needs and
the wishes of the working women. They should all know what the proletarian dictatorship
will mean to them — complete equality of rights with men, both legal and in practice,
in the family, the state and in society, and that it also spells the annihilation of the
power of the bourgeoisie.”
“Soviet Russia proves this”, I exclaimed. “This will be our great example!”
Lenin went on:
“Soviet Russia casts a new light on our demands for women. Under the dictatorship
of the proletariat they are no longer an object of struggle between the proletariat and
the bourgeoisie. Once they are carried out, they serve as bricks for the building of
communist society. This shows the women on the other side of the border the decisive
importance of the conquest of power by the proletariat. The difference between their
status here and there must be demonstrated in bold relief in order to win the support
of the masses of women in the revolutionary class struggles of the proletariat.
Mobilisation of the female masses, carried out with a clear understanding of principles
and on a firm organisational basis, is a vital question for the communist parties and
their victories. But let us not deceive ourselves. Our national sections still lack the
proper understanding of this question. They adopt a passive, wait-and-see attitude
when it comes to creating a mass movement of working women under communist
leadership. They do not realise that developing and leading such a mass movement is
an important part of all party activity, as much as half of all the party work. Their
occasional recognition of the need and value of a purposeful, strong and numerous
communist women’s movement is but platonic lip-service rather than a steady concern
and task of the party.
“They regard agitation and propaganda among women and the task of rousing
and revolutionising them as of secondary importance, as the job of just the women
communists. None but the latter are rebuked because the matter does not move
ahead more quickly and strongly. This is wrong, fundamentally wrong! It is outright
separatism. It is equality of women à rebours, as the French say, i.e., equality reversed.
What is at the bottom of the incorrect attitude of our national sections? (I am not
speaking of Soviet Russia.) In the final analysis, it is an underestimation of women and
of their accomplishments. That’s just what it is! Unfortunately, we may still say of

My Recollections of Lenin
many of our comrades, ‘Scratch the communist and a philistine appears’. To be sure,
you have to scratch the sensitive spots — such as their mentality regarding women.
Could there be any more palpable proof than the common sight of a man calmly
watching a woman wear herself out with trivial, monotonous, strength- and timeconsuming work, such as her housework, and watching her spirit shrinking, her mind
growing dull, her heartbeat growing faint, and her will growing slack? It goes without
saying that I am not referring to the bourgeois ladies who dump all housework and the
care for their children on the hired help. What I say applies to the vast majority of
women, including the wives of workers, even if these spend the day at the factory and
earn money.
“Very few husbands, not even the proletarians, think of how much they could
lighten the burdens and worries of their wives, or relieve them entirely, if they lent a
hand in this ‘women’s work’. But no, that would go against the ‘privilege and dignity of
the husband’. He demands that he have rest and comfort. The domestic life of the
woman is a daily sacrifice of self to a thousand insignificant trifles. The ancient rights of
her husband, her lord and master, survive unnoticed. Objectively, his slave takes her
revenge. Also in concealed form. Her backwardness and her lack of understanding for
her husband’s revolutionary ideas act as a drag on his fighting spirit, on his
determination to fight. They are like tiny worms, gnawing and undermining
imperceptibly, slowly but surely. I know the life of the workers, and not only from
books. Our communist work among the masses of women, and our political work in
general, involves considerable educational work among the men. We must root out
the old slave-owner’s point of view, both in the party and among the masses. That is
one of our political tasks, a task just as urgently necessary as the formation of a staff
composed of comrades, men and women, with thorough theoretical and practical
training for party work among working women.”
To my question about present-day conditions in Soviet Russia, Lenin replied:
“The government of the proletarian dictatorship — jointly with the Communist
Party and the trade unions of course — makes every effort to overcome the backward
views of men and women and thus uproot the old, noncommunist psychology. It goes
without saying that men and women are absolutely equal before the law. A sincere
desire to give effect to this equality is evident in all spheres. We are enlisting women to
work in the economy, the administration, legislation and government. All courses and
educational institutions are open to them, so that they can improve their professional
and social training. We are organising community kitchens and public dining-rooms,
laundries and repair shops, crèches, kindergartens, children’s homes and educational
institutions of every kind. In brief, we are quite in earnest about carrying out the
On the Emancipation of Women

requirements of our program to shift the functions of housekeeping and education
from the individual household to society. Woman is thus being relieved from her old
domestic slavery and all dependence on her husband. She is enabled to give her
capabilities and inclinations full play in society. Children are offered better opportunities
for their development than at home. We have the most progressive female labour
legislation in the world, and it is enforced by authorised representatives of organised
labour. We are establishing maternity homes, mother-and-child homes, mothers’
health centres, courses for infant and child-care, exhibitions of mother and child-care,
and the like. We are making every effort to provide for needy and unemployed women.
“We know perfectly well that all this is still too little, considering the needs of the
working women, and that it is still far from sufficient for their real emancipation. Yet
it is an immense stride forward from what there was in tsarist and capitalist Russia.
Moreover, it is a lot as compared with the state of affairs where capitalism still holds
undivided sway. It is a good start in the right direction, and we shall continue to
develop it consistently, and with all available energy, too. You abroad may rest assured.
Because with each day that passes it becomes clearer that we cannot make progress
without the millions of women. Think what this means in a country where the peasants
comprise a solid 80% of the population. Small peasant farming implies individual
housekeeping and the bondage of women. You will be far better off than we are in this
respect, provided your proletarians at last grasp that the time is historically ripe for
seizure of power, for revolution. In the meantime, we are not giving way to despair,
despite the great difficulties. Our forces grow as the latter increase. Practical necessity
will also impel us to find new ways of emancipating the masses of women. In
combination with the Soviet state, comradely solidarity will accomplish wonders. To
be sure, I mean comradely solidarity in the communist, not in the bourgeois, sense, in
which it is preached by the reformists, whose revolutionary enthusiasm has evaporated
like the smell of cheap vinegar. Personal initiative, which grows into, and fuses with
collective activity, should accompany comradely solidarity. Under the proletarian
dictatorship the emancipation of women through the realisation of communism will
proceed also in the countryside. In this respect I expect much from the electrification
of our industry and agriculture. That is a grand scheme! The difficulties in its way are
great, monstrously great. Powerful forces latent in the masses will have to be released
and trained to overcome them. Millions of women must take part in this.”
Someone had knocked twice in the last 10 minutes, but Lenin had continued to
speak. Now he opened the door and shouted:
“I’m coming!”
Turning in my direction, he added with a smile:

My Recollections of Lenin
“You know, Clara, I am going to take advantage of the fact that I was conversing
with a woman and will name the notorious female loquacity as the excuse for being
late. Although this time it was the man and not the woman who did most of the talking.
In general, I must say that you are really a good listener. But it was this that probably
prompted me to talk so much.”
With this jocular remark Lenin helped me on with my coat.
“You should dress more warmly”, he suggested solicitously. “Moscow is not
Stuttgart. You need someone to look after you. Don’t catch cold. Good-bye.”
He shook my hand firmly.
à à à
I had another talk with Lenin on the women’s movement about a fortnight later. Lenin
came to see me. As almost always, his visit was unexpected. It was an impromptu visit
and occurred during an intermission in the gigantic burden of work accomplished by
the leader of the victorious revolution. Lenin looked very tired and worried. Wrangel
had not yet been crushed and the question of supplying the big cities with food
confronted the Soviet government like an inexorable sphinx.
Lenin asked how the theses were coming along. I told him that a big commission
had been in session, which all prominent women communists then in Moscow had
attended and where they had spoken their opinions. The theses were ready and were
now to be discussed by a small committee. Lenin pointed out that we should strive to
have the Third World Congress49 examine the problem with due thoroughness. This
fact alone would break down the prejudice of many comrades. Anyhow, the women
communists should be the first to take things in hand, and with vigour.
“Don’t twitter like a bunch of chatterboxes, but speak out loudly and clearly like
fighters should”, Lenin exclaimed with animation. “A congress is not a parlour where
women display their charm, as we read in novels. A congress is a battlefield in which
we fight for the knowledge we need for revolutionary action. Show that you can fight.
In the first place, of course, against our enemies, but also within the party, should the
need arise. After all, the broad masses of women are at stake. Our Russian party will
back all proposals and measures that will help to win these masses. If the women are
not with us, the counter-revolutionaries may succeed in setting them against us. We
must always bear this in mind.”
“We must win the mass of women over even if they are riveted to heaven by
chains, as Stralsund puts it”, I said, pursuing Lenin’s idea. “Here, in the centre of the
revolution with its richly seething life, with its strong, rapid pulse, a plan has occurred
to me of a big, joint international action among the working women. It was prompted
On the Emancipation of Women

primarily by your big nonpartisan women’s conferences and congresses. We should
try to transform them from national into international ones. It is a fact that the world
war and its aftermath have deeply shaken the bulk of the women of various classes and
sections of society. They are in ferment. They have been set in motion. Their distressing
worries about securing a livelihood and the search for the purpose of life confront
them with problems which most of them had hardly suspected and only a small
minority had grasped in the past. Bourgeois society is unable to provide a satisfactory
answer to their questions. Only communism can do it. We must rouse the broad
masses of women in the capitalist countries to consciousness and should for that
purpose call a nonpartisan international women’s congress.”
Lenin did not reply at once. He sat lost in thought, considering the problem, his lips
pursed, the lower lip protruding slightly.
“Yes, we ought to do it”, he said finally. “The plan is good. But a good plan, even an
excellent one, is worthless unless it is well executed. Have you thought about how it
should be executed? What are your ideas on this score?”
I set out my ideas to Lenin in detail. To begin with, we ought to form a committee
of communist women from various countries in close and constant contact with our
national sections. This committee would prepare, conduct and make use of the
congress. It had to be decided whether it would be desirable for the committee to work
openly and officially from the very beginning. At any rate, it would be the first task of
the committee members to make contact with the leaders of the organised female
workers in each country, the proletarian political women’s movement, bourgeois
women’s organisations of every trend and description, and finally the prominent
female physicians, teachers, writers, etc., and to form national nonpartisan preparatory
committees. An international committee would be formed from among the members
of these national committees to prepare and convene the international congress, to
draw up its agenda and to pick the time and place for the congress.
In my opinion the congress ought first to discuss the women’s right to engage in
trades and professions. In doing so it should deal with the questions of unemployment,
equal pay for equal work, legislation on the eight-hour day and labour protection for
women, organisation of trade unions, social care of mother and child, social measures
to relieve housewives and mothers, etc. Furthermore, the agenda should deal with the
status of women in marriage and family legislation and in public and political law.
After substantiating these proposals I explained how the national committees in the
various countries should thoroughly prepare the ground for the congress by a planned
campaign at meetings and in the press. This campaign was particularly important in
rousing the biggest possible number of women, to stimulate a serious study of the

My Recollections of Lenin
problems submitted for discussion, and to draw their attention to the congress and
thereby to communism and the parties of the Communist International. The campaign
had to reach the working women of all social strata. It would have to secure attendance
and participation in the congress of representatives of all organisations concerned,
and also of delegates from public women’s meetings. The congress was to be a “popular
representative body” entirely different from a bourgeois parliament.
It went without saying that women communists were to be not merely the motive
but also the leading force in the preparatory work, and should have the energetic
support of our sections. Naturally, the same applied also to the work of the international
committee, the work of the congress itself, and to its extensive use. Communist theses
and resolutions on all items on the agenda should be submitted to the congress. They
should be carefully worded and well reasoned with scholarly mastery of the relevant
social facts. These theses should be discussed and approved beforehand by the Executive
Committee of the Comintern. The communist solutions and slogans should be the
focal point on which the work of the congress and public attention would concentrate.
After the congress they should be disseminated among the broad masses of women
by means of agitation and propaganda, so that they may become determinative for
international women’s mass actions. Needless to say, all this requires as an essential
condition that women communists work in all the committees and at the congress
itself as a firm, solid body and that they act together on a lucid and unshakeable plan.
There should be no out-of-turn actions.
In the course of my explanation Lenin nodded several times in approval and
interposed a few remarks.
“It seems to me, dear comrade”, he said, “that you have considered the matter
very thoroughly in the political sense, and also the main points of the organisational
angle. I fully agree that such a congress could accomplish much in the present situation.
It offers us the opportunity of winning over the broad masses of women, particularly
women in the various trades and professions, the industrial women workers and
home-workers, the teachers and other professional women. This would be wonderful.
Think of the situation in the big economic struggles or political strikes. What a
reinforcement the revolutionary proletariat would gain in the class-conscious masses
of women. Provided, of course, that we are able to win them over and keep them on
our side. Our gain would be great. It would be nothing short of immense. But what
would you say to the following few questions? The authorities will probably frown
very severely upon the idea of this congress and will try to prevent it. However they are
not likely to dare suppress it by brute force. Whatever they do will not frighten you.
But are you not afraid that the women communists will be overwhelmed in the
On the Emancipation of Women

committees and at the congress itself by the numerical superiority of the bourgeois
and reformist delegates and their unquestionably greater experience? Besides, and
most important, do you really have confidence in the Marxist schooling of our
communist comrades, and are you sure that a shock group can be picked among them
that will come out of the battle with honour?”
I told Lenin in reply that the authorities were not likely to use the mailed fist against
the congress. Intrigues and boorish attacks against it would only act in its favour, and
ours. We communists could more than match the greater number and experience of
the noncommunist elements by the scientific superiority of historical materialism with
its study and illumination of social problems, the perseverance with which we would
demand that they be solved, and last but not least, by references to the victory of the
proletarian revolution in Russia and its fundamental accomplishments in the work of
emancipating the women. The weakness and lack of training of some of our comrades,
their inexperience, could be compensated by planned preparation and teamwork. In
this respect, I expect the very best from the Russian women comrades. They would
form the iron core of our phalanx. In their company I would calmly brave much more
hazardous clashes than the congress battles. Besides, even if we are outvoted, the very
fact that we fought will put communism in the foreground and will have a big
propaganda effect. Furthermore, it will give us points of departure for subsequent
work.
Lenin laughed heartily.
“You are as enthusiastic as ever about the Russian women revolutionaries. Yes
indeed, old love is not forgotten. I think you are right. Even defeat after a stubborn
struggle would be a gain; it would prepare the ground for future gains among the
working women. All things considered, it is a risk worth taking. It cannot possibly
prove a total failure. But naturally, I hope for victory and wish you success from the
bottom of my heart. It would considerably enhance our strength, it would widen and
fortify our battlefront, it would put life into our ranks and set them in motion. That is
always useful. Moreover, the congress would foment and increase unrest, uncertainty,
contradictions and conflicts in the camp of the bourgeoisie and its reformist friends.
One can just imagine who is going to sit down with the ‘hyenas of the revolution’, and,
if things go well, to deliberate under their leadership. It will be the brave, well-disciplined
female social-democrats under the supreme guidance of Scheidemann, Dittmann and
Legien; the pious Christian women blessed by the pope or devoted to Luther; daughters
of privy counsellors, wives of newly-appointed councillors of state, lady-like English
pacifists and ardent French suffragettes. What a picture of chaos, of the decay of the
bourgeois world the congress is bound to present! What a portrayal of its hopeless

My Recollections of Lenin
conditions! The congress would add to the division and thereby weaken the forces of
the counter-revolution. Every weakening of the enemy is tantamount to a strengthening
of our forces. I am in favour of the congress. You will get our vigorous support. So get
started, and I wish you luck in the struggle.”
We spoke then about the situation in Germany, particularly the impending “Unity
Congress” of the old Spartacists and the left wing of the Independents. Thereupon,
Lenin left in a hurry, exchanging friendly greetings with several comrades working in
the room he had had to cross.
I set about the preparatory work with high hopes. However, the congress floundered,
because it was opposed by the German and Bulgarian women comrades who were
then leaders of the biggest communist women’s movements outside Soviet Russia.
They were flatly against calling the congress.
When I informed Lenin of this he answered:
“It is a pity, a great pity! These comrades missed a splendid opportunity to give a
new and better outlook of hope for the masses of women and thereby to draw them
into the revolutionary struggles of the proletariat. Who can tell whether such a
favourable opportunity will recur in the near future? One should strike while the iron
is hot. But the task remains. You must look for a way to reach the masses of women
whom capitalism has plunged into dire need. You must look for it on all accounts.
There is no evading this imperative task. Without the organised activity of the masses
under communist leadership there can be no victory over capitalism and no building
of communism. And so the hitherto dormant masses of women must be finally set
into motion.”
à à à
The first year spent by the revolutionary proletariat without Lenin has passed. It has
shown the strength of his cause. It has proved the leader’s great genius. It has shown
how great and irreplaceable the loss has been. Salvoes mark the sad hour when Lenin
closed his farseeing, penetrating eyes for ever, a year ago. I see an endless procession
of mourning working people, as they go to Lenin’s resting-place. Their mourning is
my mourning, the mourning of the millions. My newly-awakened grief evokes
overwhelming memories in me of the reality that makes the painful present recede. I
hear again every word Lenin spoke in conversation with me. I see every change in his
face … Banners are lowered at Lenin’s tomb. They are banners steeped in the blood
of fighters for the revolution. Laurel wreaths are laid. Not one of them is superfluous.
And I add to them these modest lines.n
On the Emancipation of Women

Appendix 4

Methods & Forms of Work among
Communist Party Women:
Theses
Basic principles
1. The Third Congress of the Communist International, in conjunction with the Second
International Conference of Communist women, confirms once again the decision of
the First and Second Congresses that all the communist parties of the West and the
East need to increase work amongst the female proletariat, educating the broad mass
of working women in communist ideas and drawing them into the struggle for soviet
power, for the construction of the soviet workers’ republic.
Throughout the world the working class and consequently working women as
well, are confronting the question of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
The capitalist economic system has entered a blind alley; there is no scope for the
development of the productive forces within the framework of capitalism. The sharp
decline in living standards of the working people, the inability of the bourgeoisie to
restore production, the rise of speculation, the disintegration of production,
unemployment, price fluctuations and the gap between prices and wages, lead
everywhere to the inevitable sharpening of the class struggle. This struggle decides
who and which system is to lead, administer and organise production — either a small
group of bourgeois or the working class basing itself on the principles of communism.
The newly emergent proletarian class must, in accordance with the laws of economic
development, take the apparatus of production into its own hands and create new
economic forms. Only then will it be in a position to encourage the maximum
development of the productive forces, which are held in check by the anarchy of
Adopted by the Third Congress of the Communist International, July 8, 1921.

Methods & Forms of Work among Communist Party Women
capitalist production.
While power is in the hands of the bourgeois class, the proletariat is unable to
organise production. While they keep this power there are no reforms or measures
that the democratic or socialist governments of the bourgeois countries could adopt to
save the situation or alleviate the terrible and unbearable sufferings of the working
women and men which result from the collapse of the capitalist economic system.
Only by seizing power can the class of producers take hold of the means of production,
thus making it possible to direct economic development in the interests of the working
people.
To accelerate the inevitable and final battle between the proletariat and the obsolete
bourgeois world, the working class must adhere firmly and without hesitation to the
tactics outlined by the Third International. The dictatorship of the proletariat is the
fundamental and immediate goal and this determines for the proletariat of both sexes
the methods of work and the direction the struggle takes.
The struggle for the dictatorship of the proletariat is the most important question
facing the proletariat in the capitalist countries. In those countries where dictatorship
is already in the hands of the workers, the building of a communist society is the vital
question. The Third Congress of the Communist International maintains that without
the active participation of the broad masses of the female proletariat and the
semiproletarian women, the proletariat can neither seize power nor realise communism.
At the same time, the Congress once again draws the attention of all women to the
fact that without communist party support for all the projects leading to the liberation
of women, the recognition of women’s rights as equal human beings and their real
emancipation cannot in practice be won.
2. In the present period particularly, it is in the interests of the working class that
women are drawn into the organised ranks of the proletariat as it fights for communism.
As the economic dislocation increases on a world scale and the consequences press
more heavily on all the urban and rural poor, the question of social revolution is more
sharply posed for the working class of the bourgeois-capitalist countries, while the
working people of Soviet Russia face the task of creating a national economy on new
communist lines. The active, conscious and determined participation of women will
ensure that these goals are more easily realised.
Where the question of winning power is posed directly, the communist party has
to take into account the enormous danger presented to the revolution by the masses
of passive working women who are outside the movement — the housewives, office
workers and peasant women who are still under the influence of the bourgeois worldview, the church and tradition, and have no links with the great liberation movement
On the Emancipation of Women

for communism. Women that stand outside this movement are inevitably a stronghold
of bourgeois ideas and a target for counter-revolutionary propaganda, both in the
West and in the East. The experience of the Hungarian revolution, where women’s
lack of class consciousness played such a sad role, must serve as a warning for the
proletariat elsewhere as it takes the road of social revolution.
On the other hand, events in the Soviet republic are a concrete example of how
essential the participation of working and peasant women is in the civil war, the defence
of the republic and all other areas of Soviet life. The important role that working and
peasant women have already played in the Soviet republic has been clearly shown: in
organising defence, strengthening the home front, combating desertion and all kinds
of counter-revolutionary activity, sabotage, etc. Other countries must study and learn
from the experience of the workers’ republic.
It follows that the communist parties must extend their influence over the widest
layers of the female population by means of organising special apparatuses inside the
party and establishing special methods of approaching women, with the aim of
liberating them from the influence of the bourgeois world-view or the influence of the
compromising parties, and of educating them to be resolute fighters for communism
and consequently for the full development of women.
3. While making the improvement of party work amongst the female proletariat
an immediate task of both the Western and Eastern communist parties, the Third
Congress of the Communist International at the same time points out to the working
women of the whole world that their liberation from centuries of enslavement, lack of
rights and inequality is possible only through the victory of communism, and that the
bourgeois women’s movement is completely incapable of guaranteeing women that
which communism gives. So long as the power of capital and private property exists,
the liberation of woman from dependence on a husband can go no further than the
right to dispose of her own property and her own wage and decide on equal terms
with her husband the future of her children.
The most radical feminist demand — the extension of the suffrage to women in
the framework of bourgeois parliamentarianism — does not solve the question of real
equality for women, especially those of the propertyless classes. The experience of
working women in all those capitalist countries in which, over recent years, the
bourgeoisie has introduced formal equality of the sexes makes this clear. The vote
does not destroy the prime cause of women’s enslavement in the family and society.
Some bourgeois states have substituted civil marriage for indissoluble marriage. But
as long as the proletarian woman remains economically dependent upon the capitalist
boss and her husband, the breadwinner, and in the absence of comprehensive measures

Methods & Forms of Work among Communist Party Women
to protect motherhood and childhood and provide socialised childcare and education,
this cannot equalise the position of women in marriage or solve the problem of
relationships between the sexes.
The real equality of women, as opposed to formal and superficial equality, will be
achieved only under communism, when women and all the other members of the
labouring class will become co-owners of the means of production and distribution
and will take part in administering them, and women will share on an equal footing
with all the members of the labour society the duty to work; in other words, it will be
achieved by overthrowing the capitalist system of production and exploitation which is
based on the exploitation of human labour, and by organising a communist economy.
Only communism creates conditions whereby the conflict between the natural
function of woman — maternity — and her social obligations, which hinder her creative
work for the collective, will disappear and the harmonious and many-sided development
of a healthy and balanced personality firmly and closely in tune with the life and goals
of the labour-collective will be completed. All women who fight for the emancipation
of woman and the recognition of her rights must have as their aim the creation of a
communist society.
But communism is also the final aim of the proletariat as a whole and therefore, in
the interests of both sides, the two struggles must be fought as “a single and indivisible”
struggle.
4. The Third Congress of the Communist International supports the basic position
of revolutionary Marxism that there is no “special” women’s question, nor should
there be a special women’s movement, and that any alliance between working women
and bourgeois feminism or support for the vacillating or clearly right-wing tactics of
the social compromisers and opportunists will lead to the weakening of the forces of
the proletariat, thereby delaying the great hour of the full emancipation of women.
A communist society will be won not by the united efforts of women of different
classes, but by the united struggle of all the exploited.
The masses of proletarian women must, in their own interests, support the
revolutionary tactics of the communist party and take as active and direct a part as
possible in mass action and in every type and form of civil war that emerges both on
the national and international scale.
5. At its highest stage, the struggle of women against their dual oppression (by
capitalism and by their own domestic family dependence) must take on an international
character, developing into a struggle (fought under the banner of the Third International)
by the proletariat of both sexes for their dictatorship and for the soviet system.
6. The Third Congress of the Communist International warns working women
On the Emancipation of Women

against any kind of cooperation or agreement with bourgeois feminists. At the same
time, it makes clear to proletarian women that any illusions that it is possible to
support the Second International or opportunist elements close to it without damaging
the cause of women’s liberation will do serious harm to the liberation struggle of the
proletariat. Women must never forget that the slavery of women is rooted in the
bourgeois system and that to end this slavery a new communist society has to be
brought into being.
The support working women give to the groups and parties of the Second and
Two-and-a-Half Internationals is a brake on the social revolution, delaying the advent
of the new order. If women turn from the Second and Two-and-a-Half Internationals
with resolution and without compromise, the victory of the social revolution will be
more sure. Communist women must condemn all those who are afraid of the
revolutionary tactics of the Communist International and stand firm for their exclusion
from the closed ranks of the Communist International.
Women must remember that the Second International has never even tried to set
up any kind of organisation to further the struggle for the full liberation of women.
The international unification of socialist women was begun outside the framework of
the Second International at the initiative of working women themselves. The socialist
women who conducted special work amongst women had neither status nor
representation nor full voting rights.
At its very first congress, in 1919, the Third International clearly formulated its
attitude to the question of drawing women into the struggle for proletarian dictatorship.
The congress called a conference of women communists and in 1920 an international
secretariat for work amongst women was established with a permanent representative
on the executive committee of the Communist International. All class-conscious
working women should break unconditionally with the Second and Two-and-a-Half
Internationals and give their support to the revolutionary line of the Communist
International.
7. Women who work in factories, offices and fields must show their support for
the Communist International by joining the communist parties. In those countries
and parties where the struggle between the Second and Third International has not yet
come to a head, working women must do all they can to support the party or group
which is standing for the Communist International and, whatever the accepted leaders
say or do, must ruthlessly fight against all who are vacillating or have gone over openly
to the other side. Class-conscious proletarian women who want emancipation must
not stay in parties which stand outside the Communist International.
To be against the Third International is to be an enemy of the liberation of women.

Methods & Forms of Work among Communist Party Women
Class-conscious working women in both the West and East should support the
Communist International as members of the communist parties of their countries.
Any hesitation on their part, or fear of breaking with the familiar compromising
parties and the recognised leaders disastrously affects the success of the great proletarian
struggle which is developing into a ruthless and global civil war.

Methods & forms of work among women
The Third Congress of the Communist International holds, therefore, that work among
the female proletariat must be conducted by all communist parties on the following
basis:
1. Women must be included in all the militant class organisations — the party, the
trade unions, the cooperatives, soviets of factory representatives etc., with equal rights
and equal responsibilities.
2. The importance must be recognised of drawing women into all areas of the
active struggle of the proletariat (including the military defence of the proletariat) and
of constructing in all areas the foundations of a new society and organising production
and everyday life on communist lines.
3. The maternal function must be recognised as a social function and the appropriate
measures to defend and protect women as child-bearers must be taken or fought for.
The Third Congress of the Communist International is firmly opposed to any kind
of separate women’s associations in the parties and trade unions or special women’s
organisations, but it accepts that special methods of work among women are necessary
and that every communist party should set up a special apparatus for this work. In
adopting this position, the Congress takes into consideration the following:
a. the oppression women suffer in everyday life not only in the bourgeois-capitalist
countries, but in countries with a soviet structure, in transition from capitalism to
communism;
b. the great passivity and political backwardness of the female masses, which is to
be explained by the fact that for centuries women have been excluded from social life
and enslaved in the family;
c. the special function — childbirth — which nature assigns to women, and the
specificities connected with this function, call for the greater protection of their energies
and health in the interests of the whole collective.
The Third Congress of the Communist International therefore recognises that a
special apparatus for conducting work among women is necessary. This apparatus
must consist of departments or commissions for work among women, attached to
every party committee at all levels, from the CC of the party right down to the urban,
On the Emancipation of Women

district or local party committee. This decision is binding on all parties in the Communist
International.
The Third Congress of the Communist International indicates that the tasks of the
communist parties to be carried out through these departments include the following:
1. To educate women in communist ideas and draw them into the ranks of the
party;
2. To fight the prejudices against women held by the mass of the male proletariat,
and increase the awareness of working men and women that they have common
interests;
3. To strengthen the will of working women by drawing them into all forms and
types of civil conflict, encouraging women in the bourgeois countries to participate in
the struggle against capitalist exploitation, in mass action against the high cost of living,
against the housing shortage, unemployment and around other social problems, and
women in the soviet republics to take part in the formation of the communist
personality and the communist way of life;
4. To put on the party’s agenda and to include in legislative proposals questions
directly concerning the emancipation of women, confirming their liberation, defending
their interests as child-bearers;
5. To conduct a well-planned struggle against the power of tradition, bourgeois
customs and religious ideas, clearing the way for healthier and more harmonious
relations between the sexes, guaranteeing the physical and moral vitality of working
people.
The party committees directly lead and are responsible for all the work of the
women’s departments or commissions. The head of the department or commission
must be a member of the party committee. Wherever possible, the members of the
departments or commissions should be communists.
The commissions or departments of working women should not work
independently. In the soviet countries they should work through the appropriate
economic or political organs (soviet departments, commissions, trade unions); in
capitalist countries they should have the support of the appropriate proletarian
organisations: party, unions, soviets, etc.
Wherever communist parties exist illegally or semilegally, they must still create an
apparatus for work among women. This apparatus must be subordinate to the general
party apparatus and adapt to the situation of illegality. All local, regional and central
illegal organisations should have, in the same way as legal organisations, one woman
comrade responsible for organising propaganda among women. In the modern epoch
the trade unions, production unions and cooperatives must serve as the basis for party

Methods & Forms of Work among Communist Party Women
work among women both in countries where the struggle for the overthrow of capital
is still in progress and in the soviet workers’ republics.
Work amongst women must be informed by an understanding of the unity of the
party movement and organisation, but at the same time show independent initiative
and, proceeding independently from other party commissions or sections, work
towards the rapid and full emancipation of women. The goal should be not to duplicate
work but to enable working women to help the party and its activities.

Party work among women in the soviet countries
In the Soviet workers’ republic the role of the departments is to educate the women in
communist ideas, to draw them into the communist party and develop their selfactivity and independence, involving them in the construction of communism and
educating them to be firm defenders of the Communist International.
The departments must help women take part in all branches of Soviet construction,
in matters ranging from defence to the many and complex economic plans of the
republic.
In the Soviet republic the departments must make sure that the resolutions of the
8th Congress of Soviets on drawing working and peasant women into the construction
and organisation of the national economy and on their participation in all bodies
which guide, administer, control and organise production are being carried out.
Through their representatives and through party bodies, the departments must
participate in drafting new laws and influence the redrafting of those which need
altering in the interests of the liberation of women. The departments must show
particular initiative in developing laws to protect the labour of women and young
people,
The departments must draw the greatest possible number of working and peasant
women into the soviet election campaign and see that working and peasant women
are elected to the soviets and their executive committees.
The departments must work for the success of all political and economic campaigns
conducted by the party.
The departments must promote the acquisition of skills by female workers, by
improving the technical education of women and making sure that working and peasant
women have access to the appropriate educational institutions.
It is the job of the departments to see that working women are included in the
enterprise commissions on the protection of labour and that the commissions of aid
for the protection of maternity and childhood are more active.
The departments must contribute to the development of the entire network of
On the Emancipation of Women

social institutions: communal dining rooms, laundries, repair shops, institutions of
social welfare, house-communes etc., which transform everyday life along new,
communist lines and relieve women of the difficulties of the transitional period. Such
social institutions which help emancipate women’s everyday lives, turning the slave of
the home and family into a free member of the working class — the class which is its
own boss and the creator of new forms of living.
The departments must encourage the education of women trade union members
in communist ideas, with the help of organisations for work among women set up by
the communist fraction in the trade unions.
The departments must ensure that working women attend general factory and
general factory delegate meetings.
The departments must systematically appoint delegate-practitioners51 to soviet,
economic and union work.
The women’s departments of the party must above all work to develop firm links
with working women and closer contact with housewives, office workers, and poor
peasant women.
The departments should call and organise working women’s delegate meetings in
order to create firm ties between the party and the masses, extend the influence of the
party to the nonparty masses and educate the mass of women in communist ideas
through independent activity and participation in practical work.
The delegate meetings are the most effective means of educating working and
peasant women; through the delegates the influence of the party can be extended to
the nonparty masses and the backward masses of working and peasant women.
The delegate meetings are to be attended by representatives of the factories of the
given region, town or rural area (where it is a question of electing rural delegates
through meetings of peasant women) or of the neighbourhood, where it is a question
of electing housewife delegates. In Soviet Russia the delegates are involved in every
kind of political or economic campaign, sent to work on various enterprise commissions,
drawn into control of soviet institutions and, finally, given work as practitioners for a
period of two months in the departments of the soviets (law of 1921).
The delegates are to be elected at workshop meetings or at meetings of housewives
or office workers according to the norm laid down by the party. The departments
must conduct propaganda and agitational work among the delegates, for which purpose
meetings are held not less than twice a month. The delegates must report on their
activity to their shops or to their residential area meetings. The delegates are elected
for a period of three months. Broadly-based nonparty conferences of working and
peasant women are the second form of agitation among the female masses. The

Methods & Forms of Work among Communist Party Women
representatives who attend these conferences are elected at the meetings of working
women in the enterprises, and of peasant women in the villages.
The working women’s departments take the lead in calling and organising these
conferences.
The departments or commissions conduct consistent and extensive propaganda,
both verbal and printed, in order to build on the experience the working women gain
front their practical work in the party. The departments organise meetings and
discussions; they organise working women in the factories and housewives in the
neighbourhoods, lead delegates’ meetings and conduct house-to-house agitation.
Sections for work among women must be established to train special cadres and to
expand work in the soviet schools at the central and at the district level.

In bourgeois-capitalist countries
The current tasks of the commissions for work among women are dictated by the
objective situation. On the one hand, the collapse of the world economy, the horrific
growth of unemployment which has the effect of reducing the demand for women
workers and increasing prostitution, the high cost of living, the desperate housing
shortage and the threats of new imperialist wars; and, on the other hand, the succession
of economic strikes by workers everywhere and the repeated attempts to begin the
civil war on a world scale — all this is the prologue to world social revolution.
The commissions of working women must concern themselves with the important
tasks of the proletariat, fight for the party’s slogans in their entirety, and involve
women in the revolutionary action the party takes against the bourgeoisie and the
social compromisers.
The commissions must make sure not only that women join the party, the trade
unions and other class organisations and have equal rights and equal obligations (they
must counter any attempts to isolate or separate off working women), but that women
are brought into the leading bodies of the parties, unions and cooperatives on equal
terms with men.
The commissions must encourage the broad layers of the female proletariat and
the peasant women to use their electoral rights in the interests of the communist
parties during elections to parliament and to all social institutions, explaining at the
same time that these rights are limited and can do little to weaken capitalist exploitation
or further the emancipation of women and that the soviet system is superior to the
parliamentary one.
The commissions must also see that the working women, office workers and
peasant women take an active part in the election of revolutionary economic and
On the Emancipation of Women

political soviets of workers’ deputies — they must bring housewives into political
activity and explain the idea of soviets to the peasant women. The commissions must
work in particular to realise the principle of equal pay for equal work. They must also
draw working women and men into a campaign for free and universal vocational
education which would help women workers increase their skills.
The commissions must see that communist women take part in the municipal and
other legislative organs wherever suffrage laws give this opportunity, introducing them
to the revolutionary tactics of their party. Participating in the legislative, municipal and
other organs of the bourgeois states, communist women must defend the basic
principles and tactics of their party; they must concentrate less on the practical realisation
of reforms in the framework of the bourgeois system and more on using the questions
and demands that arise out of the urgent needs and everyday experience of working
women as revolutionary slogans to draw women into a fight to win these demands
through the dictatorship of the proletariat.
The commissions must be in close contact with the parliamentary and local
government fractions and discuss with them any questions which relate to women.
The commissions must explain to women that the system of individual domestic
economies is backward and uneconomical and that the bourgeois method of bringing
up children is far from perfect. They must concentrate the attention of working women
on the proposals for improving the everyday life of the working class being put forward
or supported by the party.
The commissions must help draw women trade union members into the
communist parties. Special organisers should be appointed to undertake this work
under the leadership of the party or its local sections.
The women’s agitational commissions must do propaganda work to persuade
working women in the cooperatives to fight for communist ideas and assume a leading
role in these organisations which will have a very important role to play during and
after the revolution as centres of distribution.
The entire work of the commissions must be aimed at developing the revolutionary
activity of the masses, and thus hastening the social revolution.

In the economically backward countries (the East)
In countries where industry is underdeveloped the communist parties and the
departments of working women must make sure that the party, the unions and the
other organisations of the labouring class recognise that women have equal rights and
equal responsibilities.
The departments or commissions and the party must fight all prejudices and all

Methods & Forms of Work among Communist Party Women
religious and secular customs that oppress women; they must carry out this agitation
among men as well.
The communist parties and their departments or commissions must take the
principles of women’s equality into the spheres of child education, family relations and
public life.
The departments must seek support above all from the broad layer of women
exploited by capital, i.e., who work in the cottage industries and on the rice and cotton
plantations. In the soviet countries the departments must encourage the setting up of
craft workshops. In countries where the bourgeois system still exists, work must be
concentrated on organising women who work on the plantations and on drawing
them into unions alongside the men.
In the soviet countries of the East the raising of the general cultural level of the
population is the best method of overcoming backwardness and religious prejudices.
The departments must encourage the development of schools for adults that are open
to women. In the bourgeois countries the commissions must wage a direct struggle
against the bourgeois influence in the schools.
Wherever possible, the departments or commissions must do house-to-house
agitation. The departments must organise clubs for working women and encourage
the most backward of them to join. The clubs must be cultural centres and experimental
model institutions that show how women can work towards their emancipation through
self-activity (the organisation of creches, nurseries, literacy schools attached to clubs
etc.).
Mobile clubs should be organised to work among nomadic peoples.
In soviet countries the departments must help the appropriate soviet organs to
make the transition from precapitalist forms of economy to social forms of production,
convincing working women by practical example that the domestic economy and the
previous family form block their emancipation, while social labour liberates them.
In Soviet Russia the departments must see that the legislation which recognises the
equal rights of women with men and defends the interests of women is observed
among the Eastern peoples. The departments must encourage women to work as
judges and juries in national courts of law.
The departments must also involve women in the soviet elections, checking the
social composition of the working and peasant women in the soviets and executive
committees. Work among the female proletariat of the East must be carried out on a
class basis. The departments have to show that the feminists are incapable of finding
a solution to the question of female emancipation. In the soviet countries of the East,
women of the intelligentsia (teachers, for example) who sympathise with communism
On the Emancipation of Women

should be drawn into educational campaigns. Avoiding tactless and crude attacks on
religious beliefs or national traditions, the departments or commissions working among
the women of the East must still struggle against nationalism and the power of religion
over people’s minds.
In the East, as in the West, the organisation of working women must be geared not
to the defence of national interests but to the unity of the international proletariat of
both sexes around the common goals of the class.a

Methods of agitation & propaganda
The communist parties of the West and East must grasp the basic principle of work
among women — “agitation and propaganda through action”. Then they will be capable
of carrying out their most important task, which is the communist education of the
women of the proletariat and the training of fighters for communism.
Agitation by action means above all encouraging working women to self-activity,
dispelling the doubts they have about their own abilities and drawing them into practical
work in the sphere of construction or struggle. It means teaching them through
experience to know that every gain made by the communist party, every action directed
against the exploitation of capital, is a step towards improving the position of women.
Firstly, practice and action, that lead to an understanding of communist ideals and
theoretical principles; and secondly, theory, that leads to practice and action — these
are the methods of work the communist parties and their working women’s
departments must employ in approaching the mass of women.
The departments must be in close contact with the communist cells in the
enterprises and workshops, making sure that each cell has an organiser to carry out
work among women in the factory in question. In this way the departments will be
centres of action and not of verbal propaganda alone.
The departments and the trade unions must keep in contact through their
representatives or organisers, who are appointed by the trade union fractions but
conduct their work under the leadership of the departments.
In the soviet countries the spreading of communist ideas through action means
bringing working women, peasant women, housewives and women office workers
into all branches of soviet construction, ranging from the army and the police through
to those which directly emancipate women by their organisation of communal eating,
a Because work among women of the East is so important and at the same time so new, special

instructions are appended to the theses which explain how the basic methods of communist
party work among women are to be applied in the specific conditions of everyday life in the
East.

Methods & Forms of Work among Communist Party Women
a network of institutions of social education, the protection of motherhood, etc. It is
particularly important at the present moment to draw working women into work
connected with the restoration of the national economy.
In the capitalist countries propaganda by deed means above all encouraging working
women to participate in strikes, demonstrations and any type of struggle which
strengthens and deepens their revolutionary will and consciousness. It also means
drawing them into all types of party work, including illegal work (especially liaison
work) and the organisation of party subbotniks or Sundays at which the wives of
workers and women office workers who sympathise with communism work voluntarily
for the party and organise sessions to sew and repair children’s clothes, etc.
The principle of drawing women into all the parties’ political, economic and
educational campaigns is one aspect of propaganda by action.
In the capitalist countries the departments must extend their activity and their
influence to the most backward and oppressed female proletariat. In the soviet countries
they must conduct their work among the proletarian and semiproletarian female
masses, enslaved by the conditions and prejudices of everyday life.
The commissions must carry out work among the working women, housewives
and peasant women, and the women engaged in mental labour (the intelligentsia).
For the purposes of propaganda and agitation, the commissions must organise
public meetings, meeting at individual enterprises and meetings of working women
and women office-workers (either by trade or by district). They must also organise
general women’s meetings, meetings of housewives, etc.
In capitalist countries the commissions make sure that the fractions of the
communist parties in the trade unions, cooperatives and factory councils appoint
women’s organisers; that, in other words, they have representatives in all organisations
which help develop the revolutionary activity of the proletariat towards seizure of
power. In soviet countries they encourage the appointment of working and peasant
women to all soviet organisations which lead, administer and control social life and
which serve to support the proletarian dictatorship and contribute to the realisation of
communism.
The commissions must assign proletarian women communists to work in factories
or offices where there are a large number of women; they must send communist
working women into large proletarian neighbourhoods and industrial centres, as has
been tried with success in Soviet Russia
Commissions for work amongst women must make use of the highly successful
experience of the women’s department of the RCP in order to organise delegates’
meetings and nonparty conferences of working and peasant women. Meetings of
On the Emancipation of Women

working women and women office-workers from various sectors, and of peasant
women and housewives, must be organised, at which concrete demands and needs
are discussed and commissions elected. These commissions must keep in close touch
with those who elect them and with the commissions for work among women. The
commissions must send their agitators to take part in debates at the meetings of
parties hostile to communism. Propaganda and agitation through meetings and debates
must be complemented by well-organised house-to-house agitation. The communist
women doing this work must each be responsible for no more than ten households;
they must make visits at least once a week to do agitation among housewives, and call
more frequently when the communist party is conducting a campaign or is preparing
any kind of action.
The commissions are instructed to use the written word in the course of their
agitational, organisational and educational work:
1. To help publish a central paper on work among women in every country;
2. To guarantee the publication of “working women’s pages” or special supplements
in the party press, and also the inclusion of articles on questions of work amongst
women in the general party and trade union press; the commissions are responsible
for the appointment of editors to the above-mentioned publications and training
working women, both party members and nonparty members, to work for the press.
The commissions must see to the issuing of popular agitational and educational
literature in the forms of leaflets and pamphlets and they must help in their distribution.
The commissions must enable communist women to make the most effective use
of all political and educational institutions of the party.
The commissions must work to strengthen the class consciousness and militancy
of the young communist women, involving them in general party courses and discussion
evenings. Special evenings of reading and discussion or a series of talks especially for
working women should be organised only where they are really necessary and
expedient.
In order to strengthen comradeship between working women and working men,
it is desirable not to organise special courses and schools for communist women, but
all general party schools must without fail include a course on the methods of work
among women. The departments must have the right to delegate a certain number of
their representatives to the general party courses.

The structure of the departments
Departments and commissions of work among women are attached to every party
committee, at local and regional party level and at CC level. The size is determined by

Methods & Forms of Work among Communist Party Women
the party and depends on the needs of the particular country. The number of paid
workers on these commissions is also determined by the party in accordance with its
financial resources.
The director of the women’s agitational department or the person chairing the
commission should be a member of the local party committee. Where this is not the
case the director of the department should be present at all the sessions of the committee
with full voting rights on all questions concerning the women’s department and a
consultative vote on all other questions.
As well as the above-mentioned general work, the district or county department
or commission has the following additional functions: encouraging contact between
the departments of the given district and the central department; collecting information
about the activity of the departments or commissions of the district/region in question;
ensuring that the local departments have the opportunity to exchange material;
supplying the district/county with literature; sending agitators to the districts; mobilising
party members for work amongst women; calling district/county conferences not less
than twice a year, at which each department is represented by one or two communist
women; and holding nonparty conferences of working and peasant women and
housewives of the given district/county.
The members of the collegium are nominated by the head of the department or
commission and approved by the county or district committee. The director is elected
in the same way as other members of the district and county committees — at the
district or county party conference.
The members of the district/county and local departments or commissions are
elected at town, district or county conferences or are appointed by the appropriate
departments in contact with the party committees.
If the director of the women’s department is not a member of the district party
committee/county party committee, she has the right to be present at all the sessions
of the party committee with full voting rights on questions concerning the departments
and a consultative vote on all other questions.
The central party department, in addition to the functions listed for the district/
county departments, also instructs the women’s agitational department over questions
of party work, supervises the work of the departments, directs, in contact with the
appropriate party bodies, the allocation of personnel engaged in work amongst women,
checks the conditions and progress of female labour, bearing in mind the changes in
the legal and economic situation of women, participates through its representatives or
authorised persons in special commissions working on the question of improving or
changing the everyday life of the working class, the protection of labour and childhood,
On the Emancipation of Women

etc., publishes a ‘central women’s page’, edits a regular journal for working women,
calls a meeting, not less than once a year, for the representatives of all the district/
county departments, organises national speaking tours for instructors on work among
women, ensures that working women and all departments take part in all the party’s
political and economic campaigns and actions, delegates a representative to the
International Secretariat of Communist Women and organises an annual International
Working Women’s Day.
If the director of the women’s department is not a member of the CC, she has the
right to be present at all sessions of the CC with full voting rights on questions concerning
the departments, and with a consultative vote on all other questions. The director of
the women’s department or the chairperson of the commission is appointed by the
CC of the party or is elected at an all-party congress. Decisions and resolutions passed
by all departments or commissions have to be finally approved by the appropriate
party committee. The size of the central department and the number of members to
have full voting rights arc decided by the CC of the party.

On international work
The International Women’s Secretariat of the Communist International leads the
women’s work of the communist parties at the international level, unites working
women to struggle for the goals put forward by the Communist International, and
draws women of all countries and all peoples into the revolutionary struggle for the
power of the soviets and the dictatorship of the working class.n

Appendix 5

From the Old Family to the New
By Leon Trotsky
The inner relations and happenings within the family are, by their very nature, the
most difficult to investigate, the least subject to statistics. It is not easy, therefore, to say
how far family ties are more easily and frequently broken nowadays (in actual life, not
merely on paper) than formerly. To a great extent we must be content to judge by eye.
The difference, moreover, between prerevolutionary times and the present day is that
formerly all the troubles and dramatic conflicts in working class families used to pass
unnoticed by the workers themselves; whereas now a large upper part of the workers
occupy responsible posts, their life is much more in the limelight, and every domestic
tragedy in their life becomes a subject of much comment and sometimes of idle gossip.
Subject to this serious reservation, there is no denying, however, that family
relations, those of the proletarian class included, are shattered. This was stated as a
firmly established fact at the conference of Moscow party propagandists, and no one
contested it. They were only differently impressed by it — all in their own way. Some
viewed it with great misgivings, others with reserve, and still others seemed perplexed.
It was, anyhow, clear to all that some great process was going on, very chaotically
assuming alternatively morbid or revolting, ridiculous or tragic forms, and which had
not yet had time to disclose its hidden possibilities of inaugurating a new and higher
order of family life.
Some information about the disintegration of the family has crept into the press,
but just occasionally, and in very vague, general terms. In an article on the subject, I
had read that the disintegration of the family in the working class was represented as
a case of “bourgeois influence on the proletariat”.
It is not so simple as this. The root of the question lies deeper and is more complicated.
The influence of the bourgeois past and the bourgeois present is there, but the main
First published in Pravda, July 13, 1923.
On the Emancipation of Women

process consists in a painful evolution of the proletarian family itself, an evolution leading
up to a crisis, and we are witnessing now the first chaotic stages of the process.
The deeply destructive influence of the war on the family is well known. To begin
with, war dissolves the family automatically, separating people for a long time or
bringing people together by chance. This influence of the war was continued and
strengthened by the revolution. The years of the war shattered all that had stood only
by the inertia of historic tradition. They shattered the power of tsardom, class privileges,
the old traditional family. The revolution began by building up the new state and has
achieved thereby its simplest and most urgent aim.
The economic part of its problem proved much more complicated. The war shook
the old economic order; the revolution overthrew it. Now we are constructing a new
economic state — doing it as yet mostly from the old elements, reorganising them in
new ways. In the domain of economics we have but recently emerged from the
destructive period and begun to ascend. Our progress is still very slow, and the
achievement of new socialistic forms of economic life are still very distant. But we are
definitely out of the period of destruction and ruin. The lowest point was reached in
the years 1920-21.
The first destructive period is still far from being over in the life of the family. The
disintegrating process is still in full swing. We must bear that in mind. Family and
domestic life are still passing, so to speak, their 1920-21 period and have not reached
the 1923 standard. Domestic life is more conservative than economic, and one of the
reasons is that it is still less conscious than the latter.
In politics and economics the working class acts as a whole and pushes on to the
front rank its vanguard, the Communist Party, accomplishing through its medium the
historic aims of the proletariat. In domestic life the working class is split into cells
constituted by families. The change of political regime, the change even of the economic
order of the state — the passing of the factories and mills into the hands of the workers
— all this has certainly had some influence on family conditions, but only indirectly
and externally, and without touching on the forms of domestic traditions inherited
from the past.
A radical reform of the family and, more generally, of the whole order of domestic
life requires a great conscious effort on the part of the whole mass of the working class,
and presumes the existence in the class itself of a powerful molecular force of inner
desire for culture and progress. A deep-going plough is needed to turn up heavy clods
of soil. To institute the political equality of men and women in the Soviet state was one
problem and the simplest. A much more difficult one was the next — that of instituting
the industrial equality of men and women workers in the factories, the mills, and the

From the Old Family to the New
trade unions, and of doing it in such a way that the men should not put the women to
disadvantage. But to achieve the actual equality of man and woman within the family
is an infinitely more arduous problem. All our domestic habits must be revolutionised
before that can happen. And yet it is quite obvious that unless there is actual equality
of husband and wife in the family, in a normal sense as well as in the conditions of life,
we cannot speak seriously of their equality in social work or even in politics. As long as
woman is chained to her housework, the care of the family, the cooking and sewing, all
her chances of participation in social and political life are cut down in the extreme.
The easiest problem was that of assuming power. Yet just that problem alone
absorbed all our forces in the early period of the revolution. It demanded endless
sacrifices. The civil war necessitated measures of the utmost severity. Philistine vulgarians
cried out about the barbarisation of morality, about the proletariat becoming bloody
and depraved, and so on. What was actually happening was that the proletariat, using
the means of revolutionary violence forced into its hands, started to fight for a new
culture, for genuine human values.
In the first four or five years we have passed economically through a period of
terrific breakdown. The productivity of labour collapsed, and the products were of an
appallingly low quality. Enemies saw, or chose to see, in such a situation a sign of the
rottenness of the Soviet regime. In reality, however, it was but the inevitable stage of
the destruction of the old economic forms and of the first unaided attempts at the
creation of new ones.
In regard to family relations and forms of individual life in general, there must also
be an inevitable period of disintegration of things as they were, of the traditions,
inherited from the past, which had not passed under the control of thought. But in this
domain of domestic life the period of criticism and destruction begins later, lasts very
long, and assumes morbid and painful forms, which, however, are complex and not
always perceptible to superficial observation. These progressive landmarks of critical
change in state conditions, in economics and life in general, ought to be very clearly
defined to prevent our getting alarmed by the phenomena we observed. We must
learn to judge them in their right light, to understand their proper place in the
development of the working class, and consciously to direct the new conditions towards
socialist forms of life.
The warning is a necessary one, as we already hear voices expressing alarm. At the
conference of the Moscow party propagandists some comrades spoke with great and
natural anxiety of the ease with which old family ties are broken for the sake of new
ones as fleeting as the old. The victims in all cases are the mother and children. On the
other hand, who in our midst has not heard in private conversations complaints, not
On the Emancipation of Women

to say lamentations, about the “collapse” of morality among Soviet youth, in particular
among Young Communists? Not everything in these complaints is exaggeration —
there is also truth in them. We certainly must and will fight the dark sides of this truth
— this being a fight for higher culture and the ascent of human personality. But in
order to begin our work, to tackle the ABC of the problem without reactionary
moralising or sentimental downheartedness, we must first make sure of the facts and
begin to see clearly what is actually happening.
Gigantic events, as we said above, have descended on the family in its old shape,
the war and the revolution. And following them came creeping slowly the underground
mole — critical thought, the conscious study and evaluation of family relations and the
forms of life. It was the mechanical force of great events combined with the critical
force of the awakened mind that generated the destructive period in family relations
that we are witnessing now. The Russian worker must now, after the conquest of
power, make his first conscious steps towards culture in many departments of his life.
Under the impulse of great collisions, his personality shakes off for the first time all
traditional forms of life, all domestic habits, church practices, and relationships.
No wonder that, in the beginning, the protest of the individual, his revolt against
the traditional past, is assuming anarchic, or to put it more crudely, dissolute forms.
We have witnessed it in politics, in military affairs, in economics; here anarchic
individualism took on every form of extremism, partisanship, public-meeting rhetoric.
And no wonder also that this process reacts in the most intimate and hence most
painful way on family relationships. There the awakened personality, wanting to
reorganise in a new way, removed from the old beaten tracks, resorts to “dissipation”,
“wickedness”, and all the sins denounced in the Moscow conference.
The husband, torn away from his usual surroundings by mobilisation, changed
into a revolutionary citizen at the civic front. A momentous change. His outlook is
wider, his spiritual aspirations higher and of a more complicated order. He is a different
man. And then he returns to find everything there practically unchanged. The old
harmony and understanding with the people at home in family relationship is gone.
No new understanding arises. The mutual wondering changes into mutual discontent,
then into ill will. The family is broken up.
The husband is a communist. He lives an active life, is engaged in social work, his
mind grows, his personal life is absorbed by his work. But his wife is also a communist.
She wants to join in social work, attend public meetings, work in the soviet or the
union. Home life becomes practically nonexistent before they are aware of it, or the
missing of home atmosphere results in continual collisions. Husband and wife disagree.
The family is broken up.

From the Old Family to the New
The husband is a communist, the wife is nonparty. The husband is absorbed by his
work; the wife, as before, only looks after her home. Relations are “peaceful”, based, in
fact, on customary estrangement. But the husband’s committee — the communist
“cell” — decrees that he should take away the icons hanging in his house. He is quite
willing to obey, finding it but natural. For his wife it is a catastrophe. Just such a small
occurrence exposes the abyss that separates the minds of husband and wife. Relations
are spoiled. The family is broken up.
An old family. Ten to 15 years of common life. The husband is a good worker,
devoted to his family; the wife lives also for her home, giving it all her energy. But just
by chance she comes in touch with a communist women’s organisation. A new world
opens before her eyes. Her energy finds a new and wider object. The family is neglected.
The husband is irritated. The wife is hurt in her newly awakened civic consciousness.
The family is broken up.
Examples of such domestic tragedies, all leading to one end — the breaking up of
the family — could be multiplied endlessly. We have indicated the most typical cases.
In all our examples the tragedy is due to a collision between communist and nonparty
elements. But the breaking up of the family, that is to say, of the old-type family, is not
confined to just the top of the class as the one most exposed to the influence of new
conditions. The disintegrating movement in family relationships penetrates deeper.
The communist vanguard merely passes sooner and more violently through what is
inevitable for the class as a whole. The censorious attitude towards old conditions, the
new claims upon the family, extend far beyond the border line between the communist
and the working class as a whole.
The institution of civil marriage was already a heavy blow to the traditional
consecrated family which lived a great deal for appearances. The less personal
attachment there was in the old marriage ties, the greater was the binding power of the
external forces, social traditions, and more particularly religious rites. The blow to the
power of the church was also a blow to the family. Rites, deprived of binding significance
and of state recognition, still remain in use through inertia, serving as one of the props
to the tottering family. But when there is no inner bond within the family, when
nothing but inertia keeps the family itself from complete collapse, then every push
from outside is likely to shatter it to pieces, while, at the same time, it is a blow at the
adherence to church rites. And pushes from the outside are infinitely more likely to
come now than ever before. That is the reason why the family totters and fails to
recover and then tumbles again. Life sits in judgment on its conditions and does it by
the cruel and painful condemnation of the family. History fells the old wood — and the
chips fly in the wind.
On the Emancipation of Women

But is life evolving any elements of a new type of family? Undoubtedly. We must
only conceive clearly the nature of these elements and the process of their formation.
As in other cases, we must separate the physical conditions from the psychological, the
general from the individual. Psychologically the evolution of the new family, of new
human relationships in general, for us means the advancement in culture of the working
class, the development of the individual, a raising of the standard of his requirements
and inner discipline. From this aspect, the revolution in itself has meant, of course, a
big step forward, and the worst phenomena of the disintegrating family signify merely
an expression, painful in form, of the awakening of the class and of the individual
within the class. All our work relating to culture, the work we are doing and the work
we ought to be doing, becomes, from this viewpoint, a preparation for new relationships
and a new family. Without a raising of the standard of the culture of the individual
working man and woman, there cannot be a new, higher type of family, for in this
domain we can only, of course, speak of inner discipline and not of external compulsion.
The force then of the inner discipline of the individual in the family is conditioned by
the tenor of the inner life, the scope and value of the ties that unite husband and wife.
The physical preparations for the conditions of the new life and the new family,
again, cannot fundamentally be separated from the general work of socialist
construction. The workers’ state must become wealthier in order that it may be possible
seriously to tackle the public education of children and the releasing of the family from
the burden of the kitchen and the laundry. Socialisation of family housekeeping and
public education of children are unthinkable without a marked improvement in our
economics as a whole. We need more socialist economic forms. Only under such
conditions can we free the family from the functions and cares that now oppress and
disintegrate it. Washing must be done by a public laundry, catering by a public
restaurant, sewing by a public workshop. Children must be educated by good public
teachers who have a real vocation for the work. Then the bond between husband and
wife would be freed from everything external and accidental, and the one would cease
to absorb the life of the other. Genuine equality would at last be established. The bond
will depend on mutual attachment. And on that account particularly, it will acquire
inner stability, not the same, of course, for everyone, but compulsory for no one.
Thus, the way to the new family is twofold: (a) the raising of the standard of culture
and education of the working class and the individuals composing the class; (b) an
improvement in the material conditions of the class organised by the state. The two
processes are intimately connected with one another.
The above statements do not, of course, imply that at a given moment in material
betterment the family of the future will instantly step into its rights. No. A certain

From the Old Family to the New
advance towards the new family is possible even now. It is true that the state cannot as
yet undertake either the education of children or the establishment of public kitchens
that would be an improvement on the family kitchen, or the establishment of public
laundries where the clothes would not be torn or stolen. But this does not mean that
the most enterprising and progressive families cannot group themselves even now
into collective housekeeping units. Experiments of this kind must, of course, be made
carefully; the technical equipment of the collective unit must answer to the interests
and requirements of the group itself, and should give manifest advantages to every
one of its members, even though they be modest at first.
This task [Comrade Semashko recently wrote of the necessity of reconstructing our
family life] is best performed practically; decrees and moralising alone will have little
effect. But an example, an illustration of a new form, will do more than a thousand
excellent pamphlets. This practical propaganda is best conducted by the method surgeons
in their practice call transplantation. When a big surface is bare of skin either as the result
of wound or burn, and there is no hope that the skin will grow sufficiently to cover it,
pieces of skin are cut off from healthy places of the body and attached in islets on the bare
surface; these islets adhere and grow until the whole surface is covered with skin.
The same thing happens in practical propaganda. When one factory or works
adopts communist forms, other factories will follow. (N. Semashko, “The Dead Holds
on to the Living”, Izvestia, No. 81, April 14, 1923)

The experience of such collective family housekeeping units representing the first, still
very incomplete approximations to a communist way of life, should be carefully studied
and given attentive thought. The combination of private initiative with support by the
state power — above all, by the local soviets and economic bodies — should have
priority. The building of new houses — and, after all, we are going to build houses! —
must be regulated by the requirements of the family group communities. The first
apparent and indisputable success in this direction, however slight and limited in
extent, will inevitably arouse a desire in more widespread groups to organise their life
on similar lines. For a thought-out scheme, initiated from above, the time is not yet
ripe, either from the point of view of the material resources of the state or from that
of the preparation of the proletariat itself. We can escape the deadlock at present only
by the creation of model communities. The ground beneath our feet must be
strengthened step by step; there must be no rushing too far ahead or lapsing into
bureaucratic fanciful experiments. At a given moment, the state will be able, with the
help of local soviets, cooperative units, and so on, to socialise the work done, to widen
and deepen it. In this way the human family, in the words of Engels, will “jump from
the realm of necessity to the realm of freedom”.n
On the Emancipation of Women

Appendix 6

The Protection of Motherhood &
the Struggle for Culture
By Leon Trotsky
Comrades, your conference on the protection of mothers and children is valuable
because the content of its activities shows that we are working from various directions
to establish the new socialist culture, working simultaneously and in a parallel fashion.
Only yesterday I had the opportunity — though without the time required for this,
and consequently, without the necessary thoroughness — to acquaint myself with the
theses that have been presented to your conference in the form of a pamphlet. What
is particularly striking in these theses, above all for someone standing more or less on
the sidelines (though in essence, no-one has the right to stand aside from your work),
is the fact that your work has taken on an exceedingly concrete and profound character.
From those ill-defined tasks which we posed in 1918 and 1919 in all fields of our culture
and daily life, we have now passed over to a very concrete study and analysis of these
tasks on the basis of our collective experience, without limiting our essential
perspectives, and without falling into hairsplitting. This is our colossal achievement in
all the fields of our work, and it is reflected to the fullest degree in the theses on the
protection of mothers and children.
Comrades, what has attracted most attention (at any rate, of my attention, and I
think this will apply to any reader of these theses) has been the table, included in the
theses of Comrade Lebedeva, on infant mortality. I was very struck by these figures.
No doubt you have already discussed this matter in more detail, but at the risk of
repeating what has already been said, I feel I must dwell on this. Here we have a table
comparing the mortality of children under the age of 12 months for the years 1913 and
A speech to the Third All-Union Conference on the Protection of Mothers and Children on
December 7, 1925.

The Protection of Motherhood & the Struggle for Culture
1923. Is this table correct? This is the first question that I ask myself and others. Is it
correct? In any case, it is subject to verification by society. I think it has to be excerpted
from these theses, which are accessible only to you as specialists working in this field,
and made a weapon in the arsenal of our press in general, both Soviet and party. It has
to be subjected to statistical clarification and cross-checking, and if it is true, it should
be recorded as a very valuable conquest in our socialist cultural inventory.
From this table it emerges that in 1913, when Russia was significantly richer than
we are today — yes, Russia as a state, as a nation, or as an aggregate of nations, was far
richer than we are now (we are now approaching the level of production of 1913, but
not the level of accumulation, and even if you make a full comparison with the level of
industrial and agricultural production in 1913, it will still be a long time before we reach
the level of accumulated social wealth that we had in 1913) — despite this, it turns out
that the death rate for children younger than one year in the Vladimir gubernia in 1913
was 29%, while it is now 17½%. In the Moscow gubernia it was almost 28%, while now
it is about 14%.
Is this correct or incorrect? [Voices: “Correct!”] I do not presume to dispute this; I
am simply saying that you know this, and the whole country ought to learn of it. The
contrast between these figures must be carefully checked before everyone. It is striking
— such a fall in mortality, when the level of production and accumulation in the
country is lower. If this is a fact, then it is already the most indisputable achievement of
our new culture of everyday life, and above all of your efforts and organisation. If this
is a fact, then it should be publicised not only within the Soviet Union, but on the world
scene. If checking puts this fact beyond dispute, for all of public opinion, then you
should solemnly declare that from now on we shall cease altogether to make a
comparison with the prewar level.
The table shows that in the Moscow gubernia children under one year are dying at
half the prewar rate. But our prewar conditions of everyday culture were, after all,
those of haughtiness and boorishness, that is, the most contemptible, appalling
conditions. Our success in relation to these conditions is very gratifying, but these
prewar conditions cannot remain our longer-term criterion. We need to seek another
standard, and this other standard, comrades, must be sought in the civilised capitalist
world. What percentage of infants die in capitalist Germany, France, Britain and
America?
Here again I find a complete methodological parallelism, a uniform approach to
the question, in your work and that of all others. If you study the work of our industry
and agriculture, you will observe the same process there: until yesterday, until today,
we have worked and are still working with an eye on the prewar levels. We say: our
On the Emancipation of Women

industry in the past year reached 75% of the prewar level; this year, starting from
October 1, it will reach, say, 95%, and if things turn out well, perhaps even a full 100%.
By virtue of this, however, we are ceasing to compare our successes with the prewar
level. We are not obliged to compete with the prewar level, which is becoming part of
the history of our barbarism, but with the pressure — economic, military and cultural
— that we are experiencing from outside our borders. Our capitalist foes are more
cultured and more powerful than we are, their industry is superior to ours, and it is
possible that despite the fact that the capitalist system holds sway there, infant mortality
is still lower in their countries than it is here. In the event, it seems to me that this table
has to become a landmark, marking a turning-point in your work. By putting this table
to the test, by fixing it in social consciousness, we are saying: from now on we shall
make comparisons not with prewar levels, but with the most cultured capitalist states.
If we speak in schematic terms, that is, of the most basic features, the fate of
mothers and children depends in the first place on the development of the productive
forces of a particular society, on its degree of wealth, and secondly, on the distribution
of this wealth among the members of this society, that is, on the social system. The
state may be capitalist, that is, on a lower social level than a socialist state, but may
nonetheless be richer. History now presents us with just such a situation: the advanced
capitalist countries are incomparably richer than we are, but there the system according
to which these riches are used, along with their distribution, belongs to an earlier
period of history, that is, to capitalism. Our social system, in line with the possibilities
contained in it, must seek for itself criteria, models, goals and tasks incomparably
superior to those which capitalism can provide. But since capitalism is still incomparably
richer than us in terms of its productive forces, we have to pose as our immediate task
catching up with capitalism, in order later on to overtake it. This means that after we
have cleared one hurdle, the prewar level, we have to set ourselves a second task — to
match, as soon as possible, the best achievements of the most advanced countries,
where the bourgeoisie assigns the question of working-class mothers and children the
degree of attention that is dictated by its own class interests.
It could be said that if the position of mothers and children depends firstly on the
development of the productive forces, on the general level of the economy in a particular
country, and secondly on the social system, on the mode of utilisation and distribution
of the country’s wealth, then what significance does the work of your special organisation
have? I pose this as a historical question. Every social system, including socialism, risks
encountering a situation in which the material possibilities for a particular change and
improvement of daily life are already evident, but rigidity, mental laziness, servile
traditions and conservative stupidity are met with under socialism as well, as links to

The Protection of Motherhood & the Struggle for Culture
the past and as a lack of the initiative and boldness needed to destroy the old forms of
life. The task of our party and of the series of social organisations led by it, such as your
own, consists of urging forward psychology, customs and the pattern of life, so that the
conditions of life do not lag behind the socio-economic possibilities.
Where technology is concerned, the whip is a big one: the pressure coming from
the West. We have entered the European market, buying and selling. Like merchants,
we, that is, the state, have an interest in buying cheap and selling dear. To buy and sell
advantageously, you need to produce cheaply, and to produce cheaply you need good
technology and to have your production highly organised. It follows from this that in
entering the world market, we have placed ourselves beneath the lash of European
and American technology. Whether we like it or not, we have to go forward. All the
problems of our social system, and this means of mothers and children as well, depend
on how successful we are in standing up to this new world competition. There are
figures to show irrefutably that we have coped with the bourgeoisie in our country;
that on the basis of NEP, our state industry is prospering and developing; that there is
no danger of the private industrialist defeating state industry on the basis of the
market — this is now clear to everyone. But now that we have entered the international
market, the competitor has become larger, more powerful, more educated. Here we
have a new standard in the economic field — catching up with European and American
technology, in order later on to surpass it.
Yesterday we opened an electrical generating station 130 kilometres from Moscow,
the Shatura station. This is a huge technical achievement. The Shatura station was built
to run on peat, from a bog. We have a good many bogs, and if we learn how to turn the
latent energy of our bogs into the motive force of electricity, this will be a boon to both
mothers and children. [Applause] The celebration in honour of the builders of this
station provided us at the same time with a clear picture of our entire culture, with all
its contradictions. We set off from Moscow. What is Moscow? Provincial delegates
who come to Moscow for the first time see that it is the centre of our Soviet Union, a
world ideological centre for the leading of the workers’ movement. Shatura, a little
over 100 versts from Moscow, is a huge technical achievement in its size and
construction; it is the only peat-fired power station in the world.
Between Shatura and Moscow we looked out of the carriage windows on
impenetrable, slumbering forest, exactly as it was in the 16th century — and on villages,
scattered here and there, that are almost the same as they were in the 17th century.
The revolution has, of course, raised the level of culture in these villages, especially
around Moscow, but how many more features there are in these places of the middle
ages, of appalling backwardness, above all where women and children are concerned.
On the Emancipation of Women

Yes, you have recorded the first major advances in the countryside, and every conscious
citizen of our Union can congratulate you on this. However, your theses do not in any
way conceal how much slumbering darkness there still is in every village, including
along the way from Moscow to the Shatura power station. We have to urge on the
countryside to catch up with Moscow, to catch up with Shatura, since the Shatura
power station represents advanced technology, built on the basis of electrification.
Here we can again recall the words of V.I. Lenin when he said that socialism is Soviet
power plus electrification.
To speed up everyday life, so that it does not lag behind technological advances —
that is your most important task, since customs and traditions are appallingly
conservative, incomparably more conservative than technology. Before the peasants
and workers, male and female, there are no first-hand models of the new, models that
would force people to try to emulate them, and nor is there any pressing necessity to
do this. When it comes to technology, America is saying to us: “Build Shatura, otherwise
we’ll swallow you, all your socialism, bones and all, and there’ll be nothing left.”
Meanwhile, it’s as though everyday life has been preserved inside a husk; it does not
feel these blows directly, and as a result, bold collective work is particularly essential
here.
I have mentioned already that from the theses, I have learned what a great start
you have made to the work of penetrating the countryside. In the theses of E.A. Feder
there is an indication not just of the colossal need for child-care centres in the
countryside, but also of a huge pressure coming from the peasants, that is, a conscious
desire to have these centres in the villages. Not so long ago, in 1918-19, there was a
tremendous distrust of these institutions in the towns. It is unquestionably a huge
advance if new social attitudes have now reached the peasant family from this direction,
because the peasant family will also gradually be reconstructed. I am inclined to dwell
on this at particular length, since even in our press the opinion is voiced that in questions
of the family we should mimic the worst peasant prejudices, and that this follows from
the alliance between workers and peasants. In fact, our task, proceeding from the
reality in the countryside — and this includes backwardness, prejudices and ignorance,
which cannot be wiped out with a stroke of a pen — is to find a link, a vital hook to
which we can attach ourselves, so as to skilfully draw the peasant family forward along
the road that leads to the initial stages of socialism. In no circumstances should we
passively imitate the existing concepts and traditions, which are based on slavery.
What did our old culture in the field of the family and everyday life amount to? On
the top was the gentry, which on the basis of ignorance and a lack of culture, placed the
stamp of boorishness on all of social life. In the field of the class struggle and

The Protection of Motherhood & the Struggle for Culture
revolutionary politics our proletariat, which emerged from the peasantry, caught up
with the proletariat of Europe in a single bound over some 30 to 50 years, and then
overtook it, but in the area of the family and everyday life, in the area of personal
morality, our proletariat still has about it more than a little of the old, foul odour of
serfdom. In the families of the intelligentsia and the petty bourgeoisie, you can also
find a good deal of real, authentic serfdom. There is no need to set yourself the
utopian task of overturning the old family through some kind of one-off juridical leap
— you’d fall flat on your face and discredit yourself before the peasantry — but in line
with the material possibilities, with the conditions of social development that have
already been secured, you need to be active in the legal field as well, pointing the family
in the direction of the future.
I do not intend to speak now about the proposed new marriage law, which is under
discussion and about which I reserve the right to put my views. I expect that in the
struggle for a correct law on marriage, your organisation will also take the appropriate
position. I only want to dwell on one particular argument that I have been struck by.
This argument runs more or less as follows: how can we give the single mother, that is,
the mother whose relationship is not registered, the same legal right as a married
mother to receive help from the father, thus encouraging women to enter relationships
they would not enter if the legislation refused them this right!
Comrades, this is so monstrous that you ask yourself: are we really in a society
reconstructing itself along socialist lines, that is, in Moscow or Shatura, and not
somewhere in between Moscow and Shatura, in a primeval forest? Not only is the
attitude to women here uncommunist, it is an example of reactionary philistinism in
the worst sense of this word. Is it possible to imagine that the rights of women, who
have to bear the consequences of all marital unions, even short-lived ones, are guarded
too zealously in our country? I don’t think there is any need to show how monstrous
this way of posing the question is. But this is symptomatic, and testifies to the fact that
in our traditional views, ideas and habits, there is a good deal that is truly primeval, and
that needs to be smashed through with a battering ram.
Defending mothers and children in our present conditions means waging a
particular fight against alcoholism. Unfortunately, I have not noticed here any theses
about alcoholism. [Voices: “There aren’t any.”] Forgive me for arriving too late to
suggest that this point be inserted into the agenda, but I will make a plea for this matter
to be included in the agenda of your next conference, and above all, in your current
work. It is impossible to fight for improvements in the position of mothers and children
without waging a struggle against alcoholism along a broad front.
The theses state, and rightly, that irregular sexual relationships should not be
On the Emancipation of Women

struck arbitrarily from the record, and that public opinion should take a strong stand
against frequent divorces and so on. This is quite correct. But, comrades, when we
characterise sexual relationships as being frivolous, in many cases it has to be said:
there is no greater threat than those sexual relationships that are entered into under
the influence of alcohol, in a drunken state, and which make up a very high percentage
in a milieu with a low cultural level. It seems to me that your organisation has to take
the initiative in the struggle against alcoholism.
If we split the question of mothers and children into a series of issues, addressing
in particular the question of the struggle against alcoholism, then we shall all see clearly
that the main form which the struggle for more stable and civilised family relationships
takes will be a struggle to raise the level of the human personality. Abstract propaganda
or preaching will not help here. Legislative frameworks, in the sense of protecting
mothers during the most difficult periods of their lives, and providing guarantees for
children, are absolutely essential. If we allow any bias in the legislation, then it will not
of course be in favour of the fathers, but of the mothers and infants, since however the
rights of mothers might be protected juridically, because of morals and customs the
role of mothers will not in fact be sufficiently protected until we reach developed
socialism, and still more, communism. Juridically, therefore, it is necessary to provide
a maximum bias in favour of mothers and children. The struggle has to be directed
along various tracks, including against alcoholism. This will not be the least important
branch of our work in the near future.
I repeat, however, that the main thrust will consist of raising the level of
development of the human personality. The higher people stand mentally, in terms of
the nature of their interests and of their level, the more they demand of the people
close to them. The greater these mutual demands, the stronger the bond, and the
harder it is to break. The main task in all the fields of our collective work is being solved
through developing industry, agriculture, welfare, culture and education. This will not
lead to chaotic relations, but on the contrary, to more stable ones, which ultimately will
not need any juridical registration.
Once again on work in the countryside; I don’t think there is any mention here of
our agricultural communes. [Voices: “There is!”] Excuse me, that was my omission.
Not long ago I visited two large agricultural communes, one of them in the Zaporozhye
region of the Ukraine, and the other in the Terek region in the North Caucasus. Of
course, this is not yet the “Shatura” of our daily life, that is, it cannot be said that this
signals a new mode of family life in the same way that Shatura signifies a new technology,
but there are early signs here, especially if we compare these communes with the
countryside round about them. The communes have child-care centres, permanent

The Protection of Motherhood & the Struggle for Culture
establishments that are based on the entire labour collective, and act as a component
part of the big family. There is a room for female adolescents, and another for male
adolescents. In Zaporozhye, where an artist was a member of the commune, the walls
of the children’s rooms are well decorated with paintings. There is a communal kitchen,
a communal dining-room, and a combined club and library. This is really a little
children’s kingdom, housed in a specially assigned wing of the common building. This
is a huge step forward compared to the peasant family. In the commune, women feel
themselves to be human beings.
Of course, comrades, I am fully aware that firstly, this is a small oasis, and secondly,
it still has not been shown that this oasis is itself capable of ensuring that it spreads,
since the productivity of labour in these communes is still far from assured. But in
general, any social form, any cell, will be viable if the productivity of labour within it
increases, rather than remaining static or falling. Socialism can only be built, and the
fate of mothers and children assured, on the basis of economic growth. If there is
decline and destitution, all that will be possible is a return to medieval barbarism.
Nevertheless, the beginnings of new possibilities have undoubtedly been demonstrated
in the agricultural communes, which are especially valuable now that the development
of commodity production in the countryside, as it proceeds on the extreme wings
represented by well-off kulaks and poor peasants, is recreating to one degree or
another the forms of capitalist stratification. This means that any forms of cooperation
in the countryside, any forms of collective fulfilment of economic, cultural and family
tasks, of the tasks of daily life, are especially dear to us. The fact that, as the theses state,
the countryside is exerting pressure to set up child-care centres, a pressure that has
not existed until now, and that as explained here, this pressure originated with poor
peasants and has been transmitted to families with an average level of wellbeing — this
fact has colossal significance, if along with it we are going to have little productive and
family-domestic rural “Shaturas”, that is, agricultural communes. It seems to me that
you need to take these communes under your special care where their family and
domestic aspects, and the position in them of mothers and children, are concerned.
I was very interested by the attitude of the peasants to the commune Communist
Beacon. The word “beacon” is full of significance. A beacon shows the way from afar,
lighting the path for everyone. In 1918 we bestowed any number of such names, but
how many of these “beacons” turned out to be fortuitous, ill-founded, sometimes
light-minded, and how many of them went out! It was therefore very important to
check the degree to which this name was justified. It needs to be said that although this
“beacon” is shining in a province inhabited mainly by Cossacks and partly by members
of Baptist sects and so on — both these elements are rather conservative — the
On the Emancipation of Women

hostility of the old, of the past, to the communes did not persist. That is, it still
undoubtedly exists among kulak elements, but since this commune operates in a more
or less neighbourly fashion, since it has three tractors which also serve the surrounding
district under appropriate conditions, it accustoms the nearby Cossacks to the new
forms of family and domestic life, and as I have said, the earlier hostility no longer
exists. This is an important plus.
Several comrades have told me that in certain Soviet circles the attitude has arisen
that agricultural communes are not suited to the times, that they amount to anticipating
the future. This is wrong. The communes are among the embryos of the future. Of
course, the main work of preparing for the future is being conducted along more basic
lines — the development of industry, which will provide the countryside with the
technological basis for industrialised agriculture. This is the cooperative form of
distribution of economic benefits without which it will be impossible to bring the
middle peasant to socialism. But alongside this, having such living examples of new
economic forms and of new family and domestic relationships in the countryside,
having such family and domestic Shaturas, means also preparing for the future from
below, helping to work out new attitudes to women and children.
We Marxists say that the value of a social system is determined by the development
of the forces of production. This is indisputable. But the question can also be approached
from the opposite direction. We do not need the development of the forces of
production in and of itself. Ultimately, we need the development of the forces of
production because this lays the basis for the new human individual, a conscious
individual, not subject to any earthly master, and who does not fear any imaginary,
heavenly masters, born out of fear; a human individual who absorbs all of the best that
was brought into being by the thought and creativity of previous centuries, and who,
in solidarity with all others, goes forward, creates new cultural values, establishes new
personal and family relationships, higher and more noble than those which sprang
from the soil of class slavery. What is dear to us is the development of the forces of
production as the material preconditions for a higher human personality, one that is
not closeted in itself, but which is cooperative, part of a community of labour.
From this point of view it may be said that for many decades it will probably still be
possible to evaluate human society on the basis of its attitude to mothers and children
— and not only society, but also individual people. The human psyche does not develop
all its elements simultaneously. We are living in a political century, when working men
and women develop through struggle, when they are educated above all in revolutionary
political fashion. The cells of consciousness that are filled by family views and traditions,
by the attitude of one human being to another, by attitudes to women, children and so

The Protection of Motherhood & the Struggle for Culture
forth — these cells in many cases still retain their old form. The revolution has not yet
done its work on them. Those brain cells in which social and political views are located
are now worked on much more quickly and dramatically, thanks to society’s whole
structure and to the epoch in which we are living. (Of course, this is only speaking
figuratively — the process in the brain takes place differently.) As a result, we shall go
on observing for a long time that on the one hand we are building new industry, a new
society, while in the field of personal relationships a great deal still remains from the
middle ages. Therefore, one of the criteria for evaluating our culture, and a standard
for individual workers, proletarians and advanced peasants is the attitude shown to
women and children.
Vladimir Ilyich taught us to assess workers’ parties in particular on the basis of the
attitude they took to oppressed nationalities and to colonies. Why? For the reason that
if we take, let us say, British workers, it is far easier to nourish in them a feeling of
solidarity with all their class — they will take part in strikes, and even go as far as
revolution — than to force them to show solidarity with yellow-skinned Chinese
coolies, to relate to them as brothers in exploitation. This is far more difficult because
in such a case, you have to break through a shell of national arrogance that has been
formed over centuries. In just the same way, comrades, the shell of family prejudices
in the attitudes of the head of the family to women and children — and women are the
coolies of the family — this shell has been formed over thousands of years, not just
centuries. Because you are acting, and must act, as the moral battering ram that will
smash through this shell of conservatism, which is rooted in our old Asiatic existence,
in slavery, in serfdom, in bourgeois prejudices and in the prejudices of the workers
themselves, prejudices derived from the worst aspects of peasant traditions — because
you are going to smash this shell, acting as a battering ram in the hands of the socialist
society as it constructs itself — every conscious revolutionary, every communist, every
advanced worker and peasant must support you with all their strength.
I wish you every success, comrades, and above all, I hope our public opinion pays
you greater attention. Your work, which has a truly cleansing effect, which brings a
genuine salvation, must be placed in the centre of attention of our press, so that it is
supported on the shoulders of all the country’s vanguard elements, so that you are
helped to achieve successes in reconstructing our culture and our way of life. [Loud
applause]n
On the Emancipation of Women

Appendix 7

From The Revolution Betrayed
By Leon Trotsky

Thermidor in the family
The October Revolution honourably fulfilled its obligations toward women. The new
government not only gave women full political and legal rights, equal to those of men,
but still more important, did everything in its power — and in any case, incomparably
more than any other government — to provide women with genuine access to all
types of practical and cultural work. Nevertheless, even the most daring revolution,
like the “all-powerful” British parliament, cannot turn women into men, or more
precisely, cannot divide equally between men and women the burdens of pregnancy
and childbirth, and of the feeding and upbringing of children. The revolution made
heroic efforts to put an end to the so-called “domestic hearth”, that is, the archaic,
rigid, stifling setting in which working-class women perform heavy forced labour from
childhood until death. It was planned to replace the family, as a closed-off petty
enterprise, with a developed system of social services: maternity homes, creches, childcare centres, schools, public cafeterias and laundries, health clinics and hospitals,
sanatoriums, sporting organisations, cinemas, theatres, and so on. A thorough assuming
of the economic functions of the family by the institutions of socialist society, linking all
generations through solidarity and mutual concern, would have brought women, and
as a result, the loving couples, real liberation from age-old fetters. Until this task of
tasks is achieved, the great majority of 40 million Soviet families will remain nests of
medievalism, of women’s bondage and psychological misery, of the daily humiliation
of children, and of the subjection of women and children to superstition. No illusions
can be entertained here. Precisely because of all this, the successive changes to the way
the question of the family has been posed in the USSR provide an excellent
characterisation of the real nature of Soviet society and of the evolution of its ruling
Written in Norway in 1936.

The Revolution Betrayed
layer.
Taking the old family by storm proved impossible. This was not for lack of
determination, or because the family was so close to people’s hearts. On the contrary,
after a brief period of mistrust of the state, and of its creches, child-care centres and
similar institutions, women workers, and after them forward-looking peasant women
as well, realised the immeasurable advantages of socialised child-care, and of the
socialisation of the whole family economy. Unfortunately, Soviet society proved too
poor, and its cultural level too low, for this goal to be reached. The actual resources of
the state did not match the plans and intentions of the Communist Party. The family
could not be “abolished”; it had to be replaced. The real liberation of women was
unattainable on the basis of “collectivised scarcity”. Experience quickly revealed this
stern truth, which Marx had formulated 80 years earlier.
During the years of hunger workers, and to some degree their families as well, ate
whenever they could in plant cafeterias or other public dining-halls, and this was
officially claimed to represent the transition to the socialist mode of living. There is no
need to dwell further on the peculiarities of the various periods, including the years of
war communism, the New Economic Policy, and the first five-year plan. The fact is
that from the time the rationing system was abolished in 1935, the better-provided
workers all began returning to their home tables. It would be wrong to view this
retreat as a judgment on the socialist system, which was by no means being put to the
test. Nevertheless, workers and their wives made a damning assessment of the “public
nutrition” organised by the bureaucracy. The same conclusion has to be drawn with
regard to the public laundries, where it is more usual for linen to be stolen or damaged
than washed. Back to the domestic hearth! But the domestic table and home laundering,
which orators and journalists are now promoting in semishamefaced fashion, mean a
return by workers’ wives to the cooking-pots and wash-troughs, that is, to the old
servitude. The Comintern resolution on the “total and irreversible victory of socialism
in the USSR” can hardly sound very convincing to the women of the workers’ districts!
The rural family, tied not only to the domestic economy but also to the agricultural
one, is incomparably more rigid and conservative than the family of the cities. Only the
few, and for the most part, impoverished agricultural collectives introduced communal
dining and creches during the initial period. Collectivisation, as was at first proclaimed,
was also supposed to bring about a decisive transformation in the sphere of family life;
it was no accident that the expropriations extended not just to the peasants’ cows, but
also to their chickens. At any rate, there was no shortage of reports of a triumphant
advance of collective dining in the countryside. When the retreat began, however,
reality emerged immediately from beneath the froth of boastfulness. As a rule, all that
On the Emancipation of Women

the peasants receive from the collectives is grain for themselves and feed for their
stock. Meat, milk products and vegetables are obtained almost entirely from the
peasants’ personal plots. Since the most important foodstuffs are obtained from the
isolated efforts of the families, one cannot even speak of communal dining. The dwarf
farms, by creating a new basis for the “domestic hearth”, act as a dual burden upon
women.
The number of permanent places in child-care centres in 1932 came to just 600,000;
the number of seasonal places, available only during the months of work in the fields,
was around four million. In 1935 there were about 5.6 million places, but as before,
full-time places made up only an insignificant portion of the overall total. Moreover,
the existing child-care centres, even in Moscow, Leningrad and other centres, generally
failed to satisfy even the most elementary demands. “A child-care centre in which a
child feels worse than at home is not a child-care centre, but a low-grade orphanage,”
a leading Soviet newspaper laments. It is no wonder that the better-off worker families
shun these places. Meanwhile, the number even of these “low-grade orphanages” is
far too small in relation to the mass of workers. In the most recent period the Central
Executive Committee has resolved that abandoned and orphaned children should be
handed over to be raised by private individuals; the highest organ of the bureaucratic
state has thus recognised its helplessness with regard to a very important socialist
function. Between 1930 and 1935 the number of children attending kindergartens
increased from 370,000 to 1,181,000. The striking thing here is how insignificant the
figure was in 1930! The 1935 figure, however, is also a mere drop in the ocean of Soviet
families. Further research would show beyond doubt that the greater part, and in any
case, the best of these child-care centres catered for the families of managers, technical
personnel, Stakhanovite workers, and so on.
The same Central Executive Committee was recently forced to admit openly that
“the decision to do away with child homelessness and neglect is being implemented
poorly”. What lies concealed behind this impassive admission? Only by chance do we
learn from newspaper comments in small print that in Moscow more than 1000 children
are living in “extremely severe family and domestic circumstances”; that in the socalled “children’s homes” of the capital there are around 1500 adolescents who have
no prospect of housing and are destined for the streets; that in Moscow and Leningrad
during two months in the autumn of 1935 some 7500 parents were “charged with
having neglected their children”. What good did these court prosecutions do? How
many thousands of parents avoided this fate? How many children in “extremely severe
circumstances” went uncounted? How do extremely severe circumstances differ from
merely severe ones? These questions remain unanswered. The immense scope of

The Revolution Betrayed
child homelessness, not only obvious and open, but also concealed, is the direct result
of a great social crisis, in the course of which the old family has continued to disintegrate
far more quickly than the new institutions have been able to replace it.
From the same newspaper comments, and from reports of criminal activity, the
reader can learn of the existence in the USSR of prostitution, that is, the supreme
degradation of women in the interests of men who are able to pay for it. During the
autumn of last year, for example, Izvestia unexpectedly reported the arrest in Moscow
of “as many as a thousand women, secretly selling themselves on the streets of the
proletarian capital.” Those arrested included 177 workers, 92 office employees, five
students, and so on. What drove them onto the streets? Inadequate earnings, poverty,
the need to “earn a little on the side for a dress, for some shoes.” It would be futile for
us to try to discover even the approximate scale of this social evil. The chaste
bureaucracy orders the statisticians to keep silent. This enforced silence, however,
bears unerring witness to the large numbers of women in the “class” of Soviet prostitutes.
Of its very nature, this cannot be a case of “holdovers from the past”; the prostitutes
are recruited from the younger generation. Of course, it would not occur to any
reasonable person to assign the blame for this ulcer, which is as old as civilisation, to
the Soviet regime in particular. Nevertheless, it is unforgivable to speak of the triumph
of socialism while prostitution exists. True, the newspapers maintain — to the extent
that they are allowed to refer at all to this ticklish topic — that “prostitution is diminishing”,
and it may be that this really is so, compared to the years of hunger and collapse from
1931 to 1933. However, the restoration of money relations that has taken place since
then, and that has ended all direct rationing of food, will inevitably lead to a new
growth of prostitution, as well as to homelessness among children. Where there are
privileged people, there are also pariahs!
The existence of large numbers of homeless children is without doubt the most
unmistakable and tragic sign of the grievous position of mothers. Here, even the
optimistic Pravda is forced at times to make bitter confessions. “For many women, the
birth of a child is a serious threat to their position …” Precisely because of this, the
revolutionary authorities gave women the right to abortion. In a context of poverty
and family oppression this is one of a woman’s most important civil, political and
cultural rights, whatever might be said by eunuchs and old maids of both sexes. Under
conditions of effective social inequality, however, even this right of women, joyless in
itself, is transformed into a privilege. Isolated reports on the practice of abortion that
have made it into print are of a truly horrifying nature. Hence, in 1935, “195 women
mutilated by unqualified abortionists”, including 33 workers, 28 office workers, 65
collective farmers, 58 housewives, and so on, passed through a single rural health clinic
On the Emancipation of Women

in one of the regions of the Urals. This region differs from most others solely in that
information about it happened to be published. How many women are mutilated
each year throughout the whole breadth of the Soviet Union?
Finding itself unable to provide necessary medical help and hygienic surroundings
to women who are forced to do away with their issue, the state abruptly changes
course, and sets out on the road of prohibition. As in other cases, the bureaucracy
transforms necessity into virtue. One of the members of the Soviet supreme court,
Soltz, a specialist on marital questions, justifies the impending ban on abortions on the
grounds that in socialist society, where there is no unemployment, and so on and so
forth, women do not have the right to refuse the “joys of motherhood”. The philosophy
of a priest, who has the powers of a policeman into the bargain! We have just heard
from the central press organ of the ruling party that for many women, or it would be
more truthful to say, for the overwhelming majority, the birth of a child is “a threat to
their position”. From the highest institution of Soviet power we have just heard that
the decision to do away with homelessness and neglect is “being implemented poorly”,
which no doubt signifies a new rise in homelessness. Yet here we have a high-ranking
Soviet judge proclaiming to us that in a country where “life is joyful”, abortion needs to
be punished by a prison sentence, just as in capitalist countries where life is miserable.
It is already clear that in the USSR as in the West, the women who fall into the hands
of the jailers will mostly be workers, domestic servants and peasants, who find it hard
to conceal their actions. Meanwhile “our women”, the ones who generate the demand
for quality perfumes and other fine things, will as before do what they find necessary,
under the very nose of an indulgent justice system. “We need people”, Soltz goes on to
say, while closing his eyes to the homeless. “In that case, be so good as to bear them
yourself”, millions of working women might answer the learned judge, if the bureaucracy
had not sealed their lips for them. These gentlemen, it seems, have forgotten once and
for all that socialism has to banish the causes that impel women to have abortions, and
not force them into the “joys of motherhood” with the help of vile police interference
in the area that for every woman is the most intimate.
The draft law on forbidding abortions was submitted for so-called general popular
discussion. More than a few bitter complaints and stifled protests managed to penetrate
even through the fine sieve of the Soviet press. The discussion was cut off just as
suddenly as it was announced. On June 27 the Central Executive Committee turned
the shameful draft into an even more shameful law. Even some of the bureaucracy’s
inveterate apologists were embarrassed. Louis Fischer declared the legislative act to be
something like a regrettable misunderstanding. In fact, this new law against women,
with exceptions for ladies, represents the natural fruit of Thermidorean reaction.

The Revolution Betrayed
The solemn rehabilitation of the family, occurring simultaneously with the
rehabilitation of the ruble (what a providential coincidence!), arose from the material
and cultural bankruptcy of the state. Instead of saying, “We have turned out still to be
too poor and ignorant to create socialist relations between people; this task will be
carried out by our children and grandchildren”, the leaders are forcing people not just
to glue the fragments of the shattered family together again, but also, on pain of dire
penalties, to regard the family as the sacred nucleus of victorious socialism. It is hard to
comprehend the scope of this retreat!
Everyone and everything is drawn into the new course: the lawmaker and the
literary figure, the court and the police, the newspaper and the school. When a naive
and honest member of the Young Communist League dares to write in the league’s
newspaper, “You would be better off working to solve the problem of how women can
escape the oppressions of the family”, he receives in reply a couple of sharp slaps and
— falls silent. The ABC of communism is declared an “ultraleft deviation”. The stale,
dull-witted prejudices of semicultured philistines are reborn under the name of new
morality. Meanwhile, what is happening in everyday life, in all the nooks and crannies
of an immense country? The press reveals the depth of thermidorean reaction in the
area of the family only to an insignificant degree.
Since the noble passion for sermonising increases together with the growth of sin,
the seventh commandment is acquiring great popularity in the ruling stratum. Soviet
moralists need only modify the phraseology a little. A campaign has been mounted
against too frequent and easy divorces. The creative mind of the lawmaker has now
come up with such a “socialist” measure as the levying of a money fee for the registration
of a divorce, with this fee to be raised for subsequent divorces. As was noted earlier,
the rebirth of the family goes hand in hand with the growing educative role of the
ruble. The fee will undoubtedly make registration more difficult for those who find it
hard to pay. For people higher up, one hopes, this payment will not pose an obstacle.
In any case, people who have good apartments, cars and other blessings arrange their
personal affairs without undue publicity, and consequently without registration either.
It is only in the lower depths of society that prostitution has a painful and humiliating
character. At the top levels of Soviet society, where power is combined with comfort,
prostitution takes on the elegant forms of small mutual services, and even the guise of
the “socialist family”. We have already heard from Sosnovsky about the importance of
the “automobile-harem factor” in the degeneration of the ruling stratum.
Poetic, academic and other “friends of the Soviet Union” have eyes but see nothing.
Meanwhile, the marriage and family legislation of the October Revolution, once an
object of its legitimate pride, is being refashioned and mutilated through extensive
On the Emancipation of Women

borrowings from the legislative treasure-chest of the bourgeois countries. As if using
mockery to set the seal on treason, the same arguments that were earlier invoked to
support unconditional freedom of divorce and abortion — the “liberation of women”,
“defence of the rights of the individual”, “protection of motherhood” — are now
repeated in support of restricting these gains or annulling them entirely.
The retreat is not only taking on the form of repellent hypocrisy, but in essence is
also going immeasurably further than is dictated by the iron necessity of the economy.
The objective causes that are prompting a return to such bourgeois norms as the
payment of alimony are being augmented by the social interest the ruling layer has in
deepening the hold of bourgeois law. The most compelling reason behind the present
cult of the family is undoubtedly the need of the bureaucracy for a stable hierarchy of
relationships, and for disciplining young people through 40 million points of support
for authority and power.
When the hope was still alive that the nurturing of new generations could be
concentrated in the hands of the state, the authorities were not only unconcerned with
supporting the authority of “elders”, particularly fathers and mothers, but on the
contrary, did their utmost to separate children from the family, so as in this way to
protect them from the traditions of a stagnant way of life. Even quite recently, during
the period of the first five-year plan, the schools and the Communist Youth League
made wide use of children to expose, shame, and in general “re-educate” drunken
fathers or religious mothers. How successful this was is another question, but in any
case, the method served to shake parental authority at its very foundations. In this
area, which is of no small importance, an abrupt turn has now also been made. Along
with the seventh commandment, the fifth has fully regained its place in the laws. So far,
it is true, there are no references to God, but French schools also make do without the
deity, and this does not stop them from successfully instilling conservatism and routine.
Concern for the authority of elders has now also brought a change of policy with
regard to religion. The denial of God, his assistants and his miracles was the sharpest
of all the wedges that the revolutionary regime drove between children and their
parents. Under the leadership of people such as Yaroslavsky, the struggle against the
church outstripped the growth of culture, of serious propaganda and of scientific
education, often degenerating into window-dressing and childish mischief. Now the
storming of the heavens, like the storming of the family, has come to a halt. Concerned
for its reputation for solidness, the bureaucracy has ordered the young atheists to
surrender their martial armour and sit down to their books. Where religion is
concerned, a regime of ironic neutrality is gradually being installed. This, however, is
only the first stage. It would not be hard to predict the second and third stages, if the

The Revolution Betrayed
course of events depended only on the present authorities.
The hypocrisy of prevailing attitudes always and everywhere develops as the square
or the cube of social contradictions — this, more or less, is the historical law of ideologies,
translated into the language of mathematics. Socialism, if it deserves this name, means
human relations without considerations of profit, friendship without envy or intrigue,
love without sordid calculation. The more insistently the official doctrine proclaims
that these ideal norms have now been attained, the more loudly reality protests against
such assertions. An example is provided by the new program, adopted in April 1936,
of the Communist Youth League. “On the basis of the genuine equality of men and
women”, the program maintains, “a new family is being established, with the Soviet
state ensuring that it flourishes.” The official commentary expands on the program as
follows: “In choosing a life partner, a wife or husband, our young people know only
one motive and one inducement, that of love. The bourgeois marriage of convenience,
contrived for money, does not exist for our rising generation.” (Pravda, April 4, 1936)
Where ordinary workers are concerned, this is more or less correct, but “marriages of
convenience” are not commonplace among workers in capitalist countries either. The
situation is quite different in the middle layers, and among the elite. New social groupings
automatically make their mark in the field of personal relationships. The vices which
power and money foster in the area of sexual relations flourish so luxuriantly in the
ranks of the Soviet bureaucracy, that one might think the bureaucracy had set out to
overtake the Western bourgeoisies in this area as well.
In complete contradiction to the just-cited assertion by Pravda, the “marriage of
convenience” has now been fully resurrected, as the Soviet press itself admits in times
of accidental or enforced candour. Qualifications, salaries, positions and the insignia of
rank on a military uniform are taking on ever greater significance, since connected with
this are the questions of shoes, fur coats, apartments, bathrooms and — the ultimate
dream — automobiles. Each year, the struggle for a room in Moscow is enough to
bring together and divorce no small number of couples. The question of relatives has
taken on exceptional significance; as one’s father-in-law, it is advantageous to have a
military commander or an influential communist, and as one’s mother-in-law, the
sister of a high-placed official. Should anyone be surprised at this? Could it possibly be
otherwise?
One of the especially dramatic chapters in the great book of Soviet life is the tale of
discord and break-up in those Soviet families where the husband, as a party member,
member of the professions, administrator or military commander has grown, developed
himself, and acquired new tastes, while his wife, weighed down by the family, has stayed
on the old level. The path of two generations of the Soviet bureaucracy is sown with the
On the Emancipation of Women

tragedies of wives who have fallen behind and been cast off! The same thing can now be
seen in the new generation. The greatest incidence of coarseness and cruelty is encountered,
if you please, in the bureaucratic elite, where a very high proportion consists of ill-cultured
upstarts who think everything is permitted them. Archives and memoirs at times reveal
outright crimes against wives and women in general committed by the preachers of
family morality and of the enforced “joys of motherhood”. Meanwhile, the people
responsible are beyond the reach of the judicial authorities.
No, Soviet women are not yet free. So far, full equality of rights has provided
incomparably greater benefits to women of the upper strata, to female representatives
of bureaucratic, technical, pedagogic, and in general, mental labour, than to women
workers and especially, peasants. So long as society is unable to take on itself the
material cares of the family, a mother can fulfil a public role successfully only if she has
at her disposal a white slave — a nanny, a housemaid, a cook, and so on. Of the 40
million households that make up the Soviet population, 5%, and perhaps even 10%,
build their “hearth” directly or indirectly on the labour of domestic slaves. A precise
figure for Soviet servants would be no less meaningful for a socialist assessment of the
position of women in the USSR than all the Soviet legislation, however progressive.
Precisely for this reason, the statistics hide servants beneath the heading of women
workers or “others”!
The position of the mother of a family, a well-regarded communist, who has a
cook, a telephone with which to place orders with the shops, a car in which to make
trips, and so forth, has little in common with the position of a woman worker who is
forced to run from one counter to the next, to cook dinner herself, and to fetch her
children on foot from the kindergarten, if it even exists. No socialist labels can hide this
social contrast, which is no less than the contrast between a bourgeois lady and a
woman proletarian in any country of the West.
The genuinely socialist family, from which society will lift the burden of intolerable
and humiliating cares, will not need any regulating, and the very idea of legislation on
abortion or divorce will sound little better than recollections of brothels and human
sacrifices. The legislation of October took a bold step in the direction of such a family.
Economic and cultural backwardness then led to a cruel reaction. The thermidorean
legislation retreats to bourgeois models, hiding this retreat behind false speeches
about the sanctity of the “new” family. On this question as well, socialist bankruptcy is
concealed by hypocritical respectability …
There are honest observers who, especially in matters where children are
concerned, are shocked by the contradiction between exalted principles and a miserable
reality. A single fact such as the harsh criminal punishments meted out to homeless

The Revolution Betrayed
children is capable of convincing such people that the socialist legislation defending
women and children is mere window-dressing. There are also observers of an opposite
type, people won over by the breadth and magnanimity of the plan that is dressed in
the form of the laws and administrative organs. When confronted with the homeless,
the prostitutes and the mothers battling with poverty, these optimists tell themselves
that the further growth of material wealth will gradually lend flesh and blood to the
socialist laws. It is hard to decide which of these two approaches is more mistaken and
harmful. Only people smitten with historical blindness could fail to see the breadth
and boldness of the social plan, the significance of the first stages of its fulfilment, and
the enormous possibilities that were opened up. On the other hand, it is impossible
not to be indignant at the passive, essentially indifferent optimism of the people who
close their eyes to the growth of social contradictions, and console themselves by
looking into the future, the key to which they deferentially offer to leave in the hands
of the bureaucracy. As if the equality of rights of men and women had not already
been turned into equality of their lack of rights before the bureaucracy! And as though
in some book of prophesies a firm promise had been given that the Soviet bureaucracy
could not introduce a new oppression in place of liberation.
History has a great deal to tell us about how men enslaved women, how exploiters
placed both in subjection, and how workers at the cost of their blood tried to free
themselves from slavery, but merely exchanged one set of chains for another. In
essence, history does not tell us anything different from this. So far, however, there are
no positive, ready examples of how to really free children, women, or human beings in
general. All previous historical experience is negative through and through, and
demands of working people above all an irreconcilable mistrust of privileged and
uncontrolled guardians!n
On the Emancipation of Women

Notes
Introduction
2

Engels, “The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State”, Marx & Engels,
Selected Works, Vol. 3 (Progress Publishers: Moscow. 1970), pp. 191-316.
Goldman, Women, the State and Revolution: Soviet Family Policy and Social Life, 19171936 (Cambridge University Press: 1993).

The Development of Capitalism in Russia
Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 3 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1960), pp. 443-444, 546547.

The Draft Program of the RSDLP
5

Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 6 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1961), pp. 28-30.
The party program adopted at the Second Congress of the RSDLP in 1903 was worked
out by the editors of the Leninist Iskra between 1901 and 1902. The original drafts of the
program had been made by Plekhanov. Realising that Plekhanov’s drafts were not acceptable,
Lenin worked out a draft of his own in January-February 1902. The Iskra editorial board
appointed a commission to draw up a single draft program based on the drafts made by
Lenin and Plekhanov. Lenin insisted on inserting in the final draft the extremely important
clause on the dictatorship of the proletariat, a clear-cut definition of the proletariat’s leading
role in the revolution, and on laying a special emphasis on the proletarian character of the
party. Lenin also drew up the agrarian part of the program.
Factory Courts were supposed to deal with conflicts between workers and employers
concerning wages, labour protection, etc., and pass decisions on them. Agricultural courts
were to be vested with the right to lower very high rents, invalidate shackling contracts, etc.

The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart
Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 13 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1962), pp. 89-91.
The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart (the Seventh Congress of the Second

Notes
International) was held on August 18-24, 1907. The RSDLP sent 37 delegates. The Bolsheviks
were represented by Lenin, Litvinov, Lunacharsky and others. The congress discussed the
following questions: (1) militarism and international conflicts; (2) relations between political
parties and trade unions; (3) the colonial question; (4) immigration and emigration of
workers and (5) women’s franchise. The congress was the scene of a clash between the
revolutionary wing of the international socialist movement, represented by the Russian
Bolsheviks led by Lenin and the German left social-democrats (Rosa Luxemburg and
others), and the opportunist wing (Vollmar, Bernstein and others). The opportunists suffered
a defeat and the congress adopted resolutions which supplied a revolutionary Marxist
formulation of the main tasks of the socialist parties.

Civilised Europeans and Savage Asians
Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 19 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1963).

A Great Technical Achievement
Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 19.

Capitalism and Female Labour
Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 36 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1966).

The Working Class and Neo-Malthusianism
10 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 19.
11 Pirogov Congresses — congresses of Russian doctors convened by the Russian Doctors’
Society in memory of the great Russian surgeon and anatomist N.I. Pirogov. Here the
reference is to the 12th Pirogov Congress held in St. Petersburg on May 29-June 5, 1913.
12 Russkoye Slovo (Russian Word) — a liberal-bourgeois newspaper which appeared in Moscow
from 1885 to 1917.

Fifth International Congress Against Prostitution
13 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 19.
14 Leipziger Volkszeltung — German social-democratic daily newspaper published from 1894
to 1933.

Petty Production in Agriculture
15 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 19.
On the Emancipation of Women

To Inessa Armand (1)
16 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 35 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1966).
17 This refers to a pamphlet which Inessa Armand intended to write for working women, but
never did.

To Inessa Armand (2)
18 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 35.

A Caricature of Marxism and Imperialist Economism
19 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 23 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1964), pp. 71-74.
20 Organising Committee (OC) — the leading centre of the Mensheviks, formed in 1912.
21 Golos (Voice) — later Nashe Slovo (Our Word); daily newspaper published in Paris from
September 1914 to January 1915; Trotsky and Martov were the leading figures on the
editorial board.

Tasks of the Left Zimmerwaldists …
22 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 23, p. 142.
These theses were written in Russian and German, translated into French by Inessa
Armand and distributed among Swiss left-wing social-democrats for discussion.
The Zimmerwald Left group was formed by Lenin at the First Socialist Conference of
the Internationalists, held at the beginning of September 1915 in Zimmerwald (Switzerland).
Lenin described the conference as “a first step” in the development of the international
antiwar movement. In the Zimmerwald left group only the Bolsheviks led by Lenin occupied
a completely consistent position on the war and the tasks facing the socialist movement.

The Tasks of the Proletariat in Our Revolution
23 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 24 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1964), p. 70.

Materials Relating to the Revision of the Party Program
24 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 24, pp. 471-476.

Can the Bolsheviks Retain State Power?
25 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 26 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1966), pp.111-115 & 126127.

Speech at the First All-Russia Congress of Working Women
26 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 28 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1965).

Notes
The First All-Russia Congress of Working Women was convened by the Central
Committee of the RCP(B) in Moscow. November 16-21, 1918. It was attended by 1147
women delegates from factories and the rural poor. The congress approved the foreign
policies of the Soviet government and called upon women workers and peasants to support
and champion it. The congress approved the establishment of delegates’ conferences as a
new organisational form of drawing nonparty working women into socialist construction.
The congress marked the beginning of extensive party work among women workers and
peasants.
27 Poor Peasant Committees were set up by decree of the All-Russia Central Executive
Committee on June 11, 1918. The following questions fell within the competence of the
committees: distribution of grain, necessaries of life and implements, assistance to local
food organs in requisitioning grain surpluses held by kulaks and rich peasants. The decree
granted privileges to the poor peasants with regard to the distribution of grain and agricultural
implements.
The Poor Peasant Committees were the strongholds of the dictatorship of the proletariat
in the countryside. They played an important part in the struggle against the kulaks, in
redistributing confiscated lands and supplying food for the industrial centres and the Red
Army. The setting up of these committees was a further step in the development of socialist
revolution in the countryside, where they contributed to the consolidation of Soviet power
and were of tremendous importance in winning the middle peasants over to the side of
Soviet power.
By decision of the Extraordinary Sixth Congress of Soviets (November 1918) the Poor
Peasant Committees, which had by that time fulfilled their tasks were merged with the
village soviets.

Draft Program of the RCP(B)
28 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 29 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1965), p. 131.
Materials and documents written by Lenin for a draft program of the RCP(B) formed
the basis of the work of the commission which drafted the program which was adopted at
the Eighth Congress of the RCP(B) in March 1919.

A Great Beginning
29 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 29, pp. 428-431.
30 Communist subbotniks — voluntary unpaid labour by Soviet workers to help restore the
country’s economy.
The first subbotniks were organised during the Civil War, when the economy was
ruined and there was a shortage of labour. In response to the letter of the RCP Central
On the Emancipation of Women

Committee calling upon them to work in a revolutionary way, the workers of the MoscowKazan railway line turned out for the first communist subbotnik on Saturday, May 10,
1919. After knocking-off time they put in an extra six hours work repairing railway
carriages and locomotives, loading materials and performing other jobs without payment.
Their initiative evoked a response and subbotniks became a widespread phenomenon.
On May 1, 1920, an all-Russia subbotnik was organised.
Communist subbotniks played an important part in the period of the economic
rehabilitation and development alter the Civil War and foreign military intervention.
Lenin attached great importance to the subbotnik movement, calling them a “great
beginning” in “the development of labour productivity, in the establishment of a new
labour discipline and the creation of the socialist conditions of economy and life”.

The Tasks of the Working Women’s Movement …
31 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 30 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1965).

Soviet Power and the Status of Women
32 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 30.

To the Bureau of the Women’s Congress in Petrograd Gubernia
33 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 30.

To the Working Women
34 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 30.

On International Working Women’s Day
35 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 30.
International Working Women’s Day or International Women’s Day, March 8, was
begun as a day of international unity of working women all over the world in the struggle
for peace, democracy and socialism.
March 8 was instituted as International Women’s Day on the proposal of Clara Zetkin
at the Second International Conference of Women Socialists, held at Copenhagen in
1910, with the aim of mobilising broad sections of women for the struggle against bourgeois
domination. International Women’s Day was first observed in 1911 in Germany, Austria,
Denmark and Switzerland. It was first observed in Russia in 1913.

Greetings to the All-Russia Conference …
36 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 31 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1966).

Notes
International Working Women’s Day
37 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 32 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1965).

Message of Greetings to the Conference …
38 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 32.
The First Conference of Representatives of Women’s Departments of the Peoples of
Soviet Regions and Republics in the East was held in Moscow on April 5-7, 1921. It was
attended by 45 women communist delegates from Turkestan, Azerbaijan, Bashkiria, the
Crimea, the Caucasus, the Tatar Republic, Siberia and a number of gubernias with Turkic
and mountain populations. The conference delegates addressed a letter to Lenin inviting
him to attend the conference. The telephone message published here was Lenin’s reply to
the invitation.

The Fourth Anniversary of the October Revolution
39 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 33 (Progress Publishers: Moscow, 1965), pp. 52-54.

On the Significance of Militant Materialism
40 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 33, pp. 234-236.
41 Pod Znamenem Marxizma (Under the Banner of Marxism) — a monthly philosophical,
social and economic magazine, which first appeared in Moscow from January 1922.
42 Ekonomist — a journal published by the Industrial-Economic Department of the Russian
Technical Society in Petrograd, 1921-22.

To the Nonparty Conference of Factory and Peasant Women …
43 Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 33.
The Nonparty Conference of Factory and Peasant Women of Moscow City and
Moscow Gubernia met on November 6, 1922. There were more than 2000 delegates.
Lenin’s message of greetings was given to the delegates who went to invite him to speak at
the conference.

The Program of the Communist Party of Russia
44 Included as an appendix to The ABC of Communism, originally published in England in
1922 in a translation from the Russian by Eden and Cedar Paul. For the full text see
Bukharin and Preobrazhensky, The ABC of Communism (University of Michigan Press:
Ann Arbor, 1966).
On the Emancipation of Women

My Recollections of Lenin
45 The text is taken from the appendix to V.I. Lenin, On the Emancipation of Women (Progress
Publishers: Moscow, 1965).
46 The Second Congress of the Communist International met between July 19 and August 7,
1920.
47 Military Cadets — in tsarist Russia those attending officer schools. During the October
Revolution and in the period that immediately followed they offered armed resistance to
the insurgent people and Soviet power in Petrograd, Moscow and some other towns but
were everywhere defeated.
48 The reference is to the war launched by the bourgeois-landowning Poland against the
Soviet Republic in April 1920.
49 The Third Congress of the Comintern held on June 22-July 12, 1921, heard a report by
Clara Zetkin on the revolutionary women’s movement and adopted the following
resolutions: (1) On strengthening international ties of women communists and the tasks
of the International Secretariat of the Comintern with regard to work among women and
(2) On the forms and methods of communist work among women.

Methods and Forms of Work Among Communist Party Women
50 Adler ed., Theses, Resolutions and Manifestos of the First Four Congresses of the Third
International (Ink Links: London, 1980).
51 When delegates were freed from factory work for their term, while retaining a wage, they
were called “practitioners”. The idea was for them to work in various Soviet institutions and
thus gain experience of governing.

From the Old Family to the New
52 This article first appeared in English in a translation by Z. Vengerova in 1924 in the
collection Problems of Life.

The Protection of Motherhood and the Struggle for Culture
53 Trotsky’s speech was published in both Pravda and Izvestia on December 17, 1925; it was
translated from Pravda for this volume by Renfrey Clarke.

The Revolution Betrayed
54 Translated from the Russian for this volume by Renfrey Clarke.n

Glossary
Adler, Victor (1852-1918) — A founder of the Austrian Social-Democratic Party;
afterwards a reformist leader of the Second International.
Armand, Inessa (1875-1920) — Bolshevik from 1904; collaborated with Lenin in exile
before World War I; active in party work directed at women; from May 1919 head
of the Zhenotdel, the Communist Party’s department for work among women,
until her death from cholera in August 1920.
Astrakhan, I. D. (1862-1918)— Doctor, author of a number of works on social insurance,
prevention of accidents, etc.
Augean stables — In Greek mythology, the stables of Augeas, king of Elis, in which he
kept an enormous herd of cattle, and which had not been cleaned for 30 years;
Hercules cleaned them in a single day by diverting two rivers through them.
Bebel, August (1840-1913) — With Wilhelm Libknecht, a founder in 1869 of the German
Social-Democratic Workers Party (Eisenachers); later the leading figure in the
German Social-Democratic Party and a leader of the Second International. Author
of Woman and Socialism (1883). At the turn of the century waged a struggle against
reformism and revisionism but towards the end of his life he began drifting to the
right, aiming his attacks not against the revisionists but against the revolutionary
left (Luxemburg, Liebkneckt, etc.).
Bernstein, Eduard (1850-1932) — A leader of the extreme opportunist wing of the
German Social-Democratic Party (SPD) and the Second International; after Engels’
death in 1895 came forward as chief advocate of revising Marxism to accommodate
the liberal bourgeois social-reformist practice of the right-wing of the SPD.
Bolsheviks — Majority faction of Russian Social-Democratic Labor Party formed at
1903 Second Congress; led by Lenin; became separate party in 1912; led the 1917
October Revolution that established first workers’ state; later changed name to
Communist Party.
Breshko-Breshkovskaya, Yekaterina Konstantinovno (1844-1934) — A leader of the
right wing of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party; after the 1917 October Revolution
On the Emancipation of Women

she came out against the Soviet government.
Bukharin, Nikolai (1888-1938) — Bolshevik publicist and economist, member of the
RSDLP from 1906 onwards. In 1918 when the Brest-Litovsk peace was discussed
he headed the group of “Left Communists”; editor of Russian Communist Party
central organ Pravda 1919-29; succeeded Zinoviev as president of the Comintern
1926-29; after 1923 became the major spokesperson for right-wing pro-kulak
policies; formed Right Opposition 1928; expelled from party 1929; executed after
March 1938 frame-up trial (“trial of the 21”).
Cadets — The popular name for the liberal-bourgeois Constitutional-Democratic
Party formed in Russia in 1905.
Chernov, Viktor Mikhailovich (1876-1952) — Founder and most prominent leader
of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party. In May-August 1917, was agriculture minister
in the bourgeois Provisional Government, pursued a policy of brutal repressions
against the peasants who were seizing the landed estates. After the 1917 October
Revolution, he was one of the organisers of anti-Soviet revolts; emigrated from
Russia in 1920.
Communist International — Third International or Comintern; founded in 1919 as
the revolutionary alternative to the class-collaborationist Second International.
Guided by Lenin and the Bolsheviks in its early years, it later became bureaucratised
under Stalin. Following the coming to power of the Nazis in Germany without any
serious opposition from the Communist Party, and the Comintern’s endorsement
of the ruinous policy of the German CP, Trotsky concluded that the Comintern
was bankrupt as a revolutionary organisation. In 1935 the Comintern adopted the
class-collaborationist Popular Front policy, supporting bourgeois coalition
governments in Spain and France and the Roosevelt administration in the US. The
Comintern was dissolved by Stalin in 1943 as a sign to his wartime imperialist allies
of his non-revolutionary intentions.
Communist Workers’ Party of Germany (KAPD) — Formed in 1919 by ultraleft split
from the Communist Party of Germany; opposed to participation in parliamentary
elections, advocated leaving mass trade unions and forming revolutionary unions;
for a while was a sympathising organisation of the Communist International but
was condemned as adventurist.
Constituent Assembly — An assembly elected by direct and universal suffrage which,
it was promised by the unelected Provisional Government, would determine the
permanent constitution of the Russian state. On June 14 (27), 1917, the government
decided to hold elections to the Constituent Assembly on September 17 (30), 1917.
In August it postponed the elections until November 12 (25).

Glossary
The elections took place on the appointed date, after the October Revolution. Deputies
were elected according to the lists that had been drawn up before the revolution
and in keeping with the regulations set down by the Provisional Government. The
elections took place at a time when the mass of the people had not yet appreciated
the import of the October Revolution. This put the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries
at an advantage and as a result they secured a majority of votes in areas outside the
capital and industrial centres.
The convocation of the Constituent Assembly became a focus for all those
opposed to the October Revolution and Soviet power. It met in Petrograd on
January 5 (18), 1918. By decree of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee on
January 6 (19), 1918, the Constituent Assembly was dissolved because, through the
reactionary majority, it had rejected the Declaration of Rights of the Working and
Exploited People submitted by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee and
had refused to approve the decrees of the Second Congress of Soviets on peace,
land and the transfer of power to the soviets. Its dissolution had no impact within
Russia but provoked a furious storm abroad among enemies of the revolution.
Cossacks — Originally free warrior-peasants from the steppelands of south Russia
and the Ukraine; in 18th and 19th centuries Cossacks served as cavalry for the
tsarist regime.
d’Annunzio, Gabriele (1863-1938) — Italian writer and bourgeois politician; chauvinist
during the World War I.
Denikin, Anton Ivanovich (1872-1947) — Tsarist general; during the Russian Civil
War (1918-20) commander-in-chief of the anti-Soviet armed forces in the south of
Russia; defeated by the Reds at Orel in 1919; went into exile in 1920, living in France
and the USA and writing books on his military experiences.
Dittmann, Wilhelm (1874-1954) — A leader of German social-democrats; centrist.
Engels, Frederick (1820-95) — Co-founder with Karl Marx of the modern socialist
workers’ movement; co-author of the Communist Manifesto (1848), a leader of the
revolutionary-democratic movement in Germany in 1848-49, outstanding theorist
and populariser of scientific socialism.
Fabian Society — Reformist organisation founded in 1884 by a group of bourgeois
intellectuals in Britain. It was called after the Roman general Fabius Cunctator (the
“delayer”) known for his cautious tactics and avoidance of decisive battles. The
Fabians renounced the class struggle and set themselves the task of “permeating”
the bourgeoisie with “socialist” ideas. They maintained that it was possible to effect
transition to socialism by means of petty reforms. In 1900 the Fabian Society
joined the Labour Party.
On the Emancipation of Women

Fischer, Louis (1896-1970) — Nation correspondent in Europe, mainly in Soviet Union;
Trotsky regarded him as an apologist for the Moscow trials.
Freud, Sigmund (1856-1939) — Austrian neuropathologist and psychologist; he
regarded human behaviour as being based on the sex instinct.
Gärtner — Official of the Austrian Ministry of Railways, member of the International
Society for Combating Prostitution.
Gorbunova (Kablukova), M. K. (1840-1931) — Economist and statistician, writer of
Narodnik trend.
Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) — Formed in April 1917
as a pacifist breakaway from the pro-war SPD. Among its leaders were Eduard
Bernstein and Karl Kautsky. At its founding it had 120,000 members. It participated
in the bourgeois-republican provisional government headed by SPD leader Friedrich
Ebert in November-December 1918. It attained a maximum membership of 750,000
by November 1919. In December 1920, following the party’s Halle Congress in
October, the USPD majority fused with the Communist Party of Germany (KPD),
while the minority retained the party name until rejoining the SPD in 1922.
Jogiches, Leon (Tyszka) (1867-1919) — A leading figure in the Polish and German
working-class movements and close collaborator of Rosa Luxemburg; fought in
the left wing of German Social-Democratic Party; a founder of the Internationale
group, the Spartacist League and the Communist Party; arrested and murdered in
1919, a month after similar killings of Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht.
Key, Ellen (1849-1926) — Swedish bourgeois writer; author of works on women’s
movement and education of children.
Kharizomenov, S. A. (1854-1917) — Russian Zemstvo statistician and economist.
Kievsky, P. — See Pyatakov, Yuri.
Kolchak, Aleksandr Vasilyevich (1873-1920) — Tsarist admiral, monarchist, head of
the White armies in Siberia and “supreme ruler” of the White forces in 1918-19;
tried and executed after his forces were defeated by the Red Army.
Lebedeva, Vera — Bolshevik; doctor with interest in pediatrics; head of the Department
for the Protection of Maternity and Infancy (OMM).
Legien, Karl (1861-1920) — Leading member of the right wing of the Social-Democratic
Party of Germany (SPD) and outspoken apologist for German imperialism during
World War I; head of the SPD-aligned trade union movement.
Lenin, V.I. (1870-1924) — Founder and leader of the Bolshevik Party; principal leader
of the October 1917 Russian revolution; founder of the Communist International;
outstanding Marxist theorist of 20th century.
Lichkus, L.G. (1858-1926) — Doctor; director of the Mariinsky Maternity Home in St.

Glossary
Petersburg.
Lilina, Zlata I. (1881-1929) — Old Bolshevik; active in international socialist women’s
movement and party work directed at women; after 1917 held various posts in
Soviet government.
Litvinov, Maxim Maximovich (1876-1951) — Old Bolshevik; member of united RSDLP
delegation to 1907 Stuttgart Conference of Second International; member of
International Socialist Bureau after 1912; Commissar of Foreign Affairs in 193039, replaced by Molotov on eve of 1939 Hitler-Stalin pact.
Lunacharsky, Anatole V. (1875-1933) — Old Bolshevik; member in 1917 of Trotsky’s
Mezhrayontzi (Interdistrict) Group in 1917 and with them joined Bolsheviks in
July; People’s Commissar of Education 1917-29; played key role in reconciling the
academic intelligentsia to the Soviet regime; wrote Revolutionary Silhouettes (1923),
a collection of portraits of the Bolshevik leaders. For memorial article see Trotsky,
“Anatole Vasilievich Lunacharsky”, Writings of Leon Trotsky (1933-34) (Pathfinder
Press: New York, 1972).
Luther, Martin (1483-1546) — A leader of the German Reformation; founder of
Protestantism (Lutheranism) in Germany; ideologist of the German burghers; in
1525 Peasant War sided with princes against insurgent peasants and urban poor.
Luxemburg, Rosa (1871-1919) — Outstanding figure in the international workingclass movement; author of a number of important works on economic theory,
politics and culture; helped initiate Polish social-democratic movement; from 1897
actively participated in the German social-democratic movement and played a
leading role in the struggle against Bernstein and the revisionists; from 1910 led the
revolutionary opposition within German Social-Democratic Party; jailed February
1915 but played key role in formation of the Spartacus League; from prison authored
the famous antiwar “Junius” pamphlet; freed by the 1918 revolution, she was a
founder of the Communist Party of Germany and the editor of its paper, Die Rote
Fahne; in January 1919 was arrested and murdered by counter-revolutionary troops
of the right-wing social-democratic government.
Malthusianism — Reactionary doctrine propounded by the English economist Thomas
Malthus (1766-1834), who sought to prove that the population was growing faster
than the means of subsistence and that the misery and poverty of the working class
under capitalism were due to the rapid growth of the population, and not to the
capitalist exploitation of the workers.
Malthusianism was an attempt to exonerate capitalism and to prove the
inevitability of privation and misery for the working class under any social system.
It was an attempt to conceal from the masses the real causes of their misery and to
On the Emancipation of Women

divert them from the struggle against the capitalist system.
Marx scathingly criticised the theory of Malthus and proved that the poverty
of the masses was the product of capitalism and that it was caused by the
appropriation of the workers’ unpaid labour by the capitalists. He showed that the
destruction of capitalism and transition to socialism would put an end to the
misery and privations of the working class.
Marx showed that no overall law of the growth of population actually existed
and that every socioeconomic formation had its own law of population growth.
In the 1870s Malthusianism reappeared in the shape of neomalthusianism which
tried to justify the growing impoverishment of the working people by pseudoscientific theories of “absolute overpopulation”, diminishing returns of the soil,
etc. Neomalthusianism regards birth control, wars and epidemics as means of
bolstering up capitalism and alleviating the misery of the masses. Many of its
exponents advocate race discrimination
Marx, Karl (1818-83) — Co-founder with Frederick Engels of scientific socialism; leader
of the Communist League 1847-52; co-author of the Communist Manifesto; central
leader of the International Working Men’s Association (the First International)
1864-76; author of Capital: A Critique of Political Economy.
Mensheviks — Literally “of the minority”; originated in split at 1903 2nd congress of
the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party in opposition to the Bolsheviks
(literally, “of the majority”) led by Lenin. Afterwards, it was used to designate the
pseudo-Marxist petty-bourgeois reformist current within the Russian socialist
movement. The Mensheviks claimed allegiance to Marxism, but believed that the
working class should combine with the liberal bourgeoisie to overthrow tsarism
and establish a bourgeois “democratic republic”. In 1912 the Bolshevik faction led
by Lenin expelled the Mensheviks from the RSDLP. They supported and
participated in the bourgeois Provisional Government in 1917. During the civil war
that followed the Bolshevik-led overthrow of the Provisional Government by the
soviets (councils) of workers’, soldiers’ and peasants’ deputies in November 1917,
one wing of the Mensheviks supported the counter-revolutionary White armies.
Morgan, John Pierpont (1837-1913) — Leading pre-World War I US industrialist and
financier; Morgan is one of a handful of financial groups which controls the US
economy.
Morley, John (1838-1923) — English Liberal politician and writer; secretary of state for
India from 1905 to 1910, suppressed the national liberation movement.
Morozovs— Big textile manufacturers in Russia.
Narodniks — Representatives of an ideological and political trend which arose in

Glossary
Russia in the 1870s. The distinctive features of the Narodnik ideology were the
denial of the leading role of the proletariat in the revolutionary movement and the
erroneous belief that socialist revolution could be carried out by the small
proprietors, the peasants. They regarded the village commune, which was actually
a relic of feudalism and serfdom in the Russian countryside, as a nucleus of socialism,
etc. Narodnik socialism was divorced from the actual development of society and
was merely a phrase, a dream, a pious wish. In the 1880s and 1890s the Narodniks
reconciled themselves to tsarism, began to champion the interests of the kulaks
and fought furiously against Marxism.
Neomalthusianism — See Malthusianism.
NEP — Adopted by 10th congress of the Soviet Communist Party in March 1921, the
New Economic Policy replaced the emergency system of war communism (191821); forced requisitioning of peasant grain surpluses gave way to a modest tax in
kind, limited private trade and private enterprise in general was permitted, and the
state looked for joint ventures with foreign capitalists; the policy was successful in
restarting the economy after the devastating Civil War.
Plehkanov, Georgi Valentinovich (1856-1918) — Leader of the Russian and
international working-class movement, first propagandist of Marxism in Russia;
he formed the Emancipation of Labour group, the first Russian Marxist
organisation, in Geneva in 1883. After the Second Congress of the RSDLP he
adopted a conciliating stand towards opportunism, and later joined the Mensheviks;
during the first Russian revolution he shared the Menshevik views on all the major
questions; during World War I (1914-18) he was a social-chauvinist; he adopted a
hostile attitude towards the Bolshevik-led October Revolution, but did not take
part in the struggle against the Soviet government.
Popp, Adelheid (b. 1869) — Austrian social-democrat, publicist and writer; founder
and leader of the social-democratic women’s movement in Austria.
Preobrazhensky, Evgeny A. (1886-1937) — Old Bolshevik; Left Communist during
Brest-Litovsk struggle; early supporter of Left Opposition; author of From NEP to
Socialism and The New Economics; capitulated to Stalin 1929; named as a defendant
in August 1936 show trial but did not appear; assumed executed 1937.
Pyatakov, Yuri (Georgi) Leonidovich (1890-1937) — Used pseudonym P. Kievsky in
prewar writings; Old Bolshevik; mentioned in Lenin’s testament as one of the “two
ablest young men in the party”; member of Left Opposition 1923-28; expelled
from Communist Party 1927 but quickly capitulated and was reinstated; defendant
in Stalin’s second Moscow show trial (January 1937), found guilty and executed.
Ramsay, William (1852-1916) — English chemist, known mainly for his works in the
On the Emancipation of Women

field of physical chemistry.
Rockefeller, House of — Capitalist dynasty begun by John D. Rockefeller (1839-1937),
founder of the Standard Oil trust; one of the handful of financial groups which
control the US economy.
Rothstein, F.A. (1871-1953) — Russian social-democrat; compelled to emigrate from
Russia in 1890, he became active in the British labour movement and was one of
the founders of the Communist Party of Great Britain (1920). Author of a number
of works on the history of imperialism.
Ryabushinsky P.P. — A big Russian capitalist and banker.
Scheidemann, Philip (1865-1939) — A leader of the right-wing of German socialdemocracy; rabid patriot during war; entered last government under monarchy to
try and stabilise the situation; member of SPD-led provisional government 191819; one of the organisers of the brutal suppression of the German working-class
movement in early 1919; chancellor 1919.
Second International — Established in 1889; united socialist parties in a number of
countries. In the period before the World War I, a great organisational and
educational work was accomplished under its banner, particularly by the German
social-democracy, its largest and most influential section. However, it embraced
both revolutionary and pro-capitalist elements and failed the decisive test of the
war, with most party leaderships supporting their respective governments. After
the war, inspired by the Russian Revolution, the revolutionary elements established
the Communist International in 1919. The Second International was resurrected
at a conference in Berne (Switzerland) in the same year; only the parties which
represented the right, opportunist wing of the socialist movement joined it. Today
it exists as the Socialist International.
Semashko, N.A. (1874-1949) — Old Bolshevik; People’s Commissar for Health in
1923.
Semkovsky, S.Y. (1882-1937) — Leading Menshevik; one of the five members of the
Menshevik Secretariat Abroad (among the other members were Pavel Axelrod
and Yuri Martov) which operated from 1912 to 1917; broke with Mensheviks in
1920 and joined Russian Communist Party; executed in Stalin purges.
Socialist-Revolutionary Party — SRs or Social Revolutionaries; founded in 1900;
emerged as the political expression of the earlier Narodnik (populist) currents.
They advocated a revolution to overthrow Tsarism and achieve “socialism”, by
which they meant not the abolition of capitalist ownership of industry by the
proletariat but the “socialisation” (egalitarian distribution) of land by the labouring
classes in general (wage workers, the urban petty-bourgeoisie, and the peasantry).

Glossary
The Bolsheviks described the SRs as petty-bourgeois democrats expressing the
outlook and interests of the peasantry. The right wing of the SRs, which oriented
toward an alliance with the liberal bourgeois Constitutional Democrats (Cadets),
was led by Aleksandr Kerensky, who became head of the landlord-capitalist
Provisional Government in 1917. Toward the end of 1917 the SR Party split into
pro- and anti-Bolshevik wings. The Left SRs supported the October Revolution
and participated in the Soviet government until July 1918 when they organised an
attempted coup against the Bolsheviks. During the Russian Civil War both wings
of the SRs aligned themselves with the monarchist-led White armies against the
Soviet workers’ and peasants’ republic.
Soltz, Aron — Old Bolshevik; Stalinist; worked in judicial system; died during World
War II years.
Sorokin, Piritim A. (1889-1968) — Socialist-Revolutionary; before 1917 an assistantprofessor at St. Petersburg University; between 1919-1922 professor of sociology
at the Higher School in Petrograd; expelled from Russia for counter-revolutionary
activities; eventually became Professor of Sociology at Harvard University and
published numerous academic works.
Spartacists — Originated as a revolutionary current in the German Social-Democratic
Party (SPD) during World War I, opposing the SPD leadership’s pro-war position.
Among its leaders were Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, Franz Mehring, Leo
Jogiches and Clara Zetkin.
In April 1915, Luxemburg and Mehring started publication of the magazine
Die Internationale. In 1916 the Internationale group began to publish illegally and
circulate “political letters” over the name Spartacus and assumed the name of the
Spartacus group. On November 11, 1918 the group constituted itself as an
independent organisation, the Spartacus League, operating as public faction within
the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany (USPD). On January 1,
1919 the Berlin-based Spartacus League fused with other revolutionary groups in
Germany to form the Communist Party (KPD). In January 1919 the best known
leaders of the Spartacists, Luxemburg and Liebkneckt, were arrested and murdered
by troops of the SPD-led provisional government.
Stakhanovism — A special system of speed-up of production introduced in the Soviet
Union in 1936, which led to wide wage disparities and fostered the creation of a
layer of privileged workers (Stakhonovists) as a base of social support within the
Soviet working class for the rule of the Stalinist bureaucracy.
Svidersky, A.I. (1878-1933) — Old Bolshevik; after 1917 October Revolution, held a
number of government posts including as a member of the board of the People’s
On the Emancipation of Women

Commissariat for Food.
Thermidor — The month in the new calendar proclaimed by the French bourgeois
revolution in which the radical Jacobins led by Robespierre were overthrown by a
reactionary wing within the republican camp, which while preserving bourgeois
property relations established by the revolution reversed the democratic and
egalitarian measures of the petty-bourgeois Jacobin regime. The event most closely
identified with this change is the execution of Robespierre on July 27, 1794. Trotsky
used the term as a historical analogy to designate the seizure of political power by
the reactionary petty-bourgeois Stalinist bureaucracy within the framework of the
socialist property forms created by the proletarian revolution.
Trotsky, Leon (1879-1940) —A leading member of the RSDLP. He aligned himself
with the Mensheviks in 1903-04, after which he took an independent position
within the party. In July 1917 he joined the Bolsheviks and became a central leader.
Chief organiser of October insurrection; first commissar of foreign affairs after
revolution; leader of Red Army (1918-25). After Lenin’s death, led communist
opposition to Stalinism; exiled in 1929; founded Fourth International in 1938;
assassinated in Mexico by Stalinist agent August 21, 1940.
Tsereteli, Irakly G. (1882-1959) — A leader of the Mensheviks. In May 1917 he became
minister of posts and telegraphs in the bourgeois Provisional Government; head
of the counter-revolutionary Menshevik government in Georgia after the 1917
October Revolution; counter-revolutionary émigré after the triumph of Soviet
power in Georgia in 1921.
Two-and-Half International — Derogatory name for International Association of
Socialist Parties; formed in 1921 by centrist organisations that had left the Second
International, which it rejoined in 1923.
Versailles, Treaty of — Concluded World War I (1914-18); signed on June 28, 1919 by
representatives of the Allied Powers (Britain, France, Italy, Japan and the USA), on
the one hand, and Germany, on the other. Forced on Germany by the allied
powers, it assigned Germany and its allies responsibility for the war and imposed
heavy reparations, occupation and demilitarisation of the Rhineland and limitation
of German armed forces; German colonies were parcelled out among victors.
The whole burden imposed by the Treaty of Versailles was borne by the
German people, who had to pay huge taxes and suffer the ordeal of chronic
unemployment; the capitalist industrial magnates retained their dominant position
in the country and continued to pocket huge profits.
Vigdorchik, N. A. (1874-1954) — Doctor; author of a number of works on social
insurance and occupational diseases.

Glossary
Vollmar, Georg Heinrich von (1850-1922) — A leader of the social-democratic
movement in Bavaria; in 1891 he advanced reformist views, predating Bernstein as
the pioneer of the revisionist trend.
Wrangel, Pyotr N. (1878-1928) — Tsarist general; White military leader in Ukraine
and south Russia during civil war; fled abroad in November 1920 after final defeat
of his forces by Red Army in Crimea.
Yakovleva, Varvara N. (1884-1938?) — Old Bolshevik; elected candidate member of
Central Committee at Sixth Congress in July 1917; part of Left Communist
opposition to Brest-Litovsk peace treaty; held number of responsible government
posts; initially supporter of Left Opposition but became follower of Bukharin;
arrested after 1936 first Moscow show trial; executed or died in camps.
Yaroslavsky, Emelyan (1878-1943) — Old Bolshevik; a leading Stalinist specialist in the
campaign against Trotskyism in the 1920s.
Zetkin, Clara (1857-1933) — Prominent figure in the German and international workingclass movement; collaborator of Rosa Luxemburg in German Social-Democratic
Party; a founder of the Spartacist League and then the German Communist Party; a
leading figure in the Communist Party and the Communist International.
Zietz, Luise (1865-1922) — A leader of the German Social-Democratic Party; teacher
by profession; at the 1907 Stuttgart Congress of the Second International supported
the demand for women’s suffrage.
Zimmerwald Conference — Called on the initiative of the Swiss and Italian socialist
parties to bring together the antiwar elements of the European socialist movement,
it was held in the Swiss mountain village of Zimmerwald on September 5-8, 1915.
It was the first international gathering of socialists during the war.
A struggle developed at the conference between the revolutionary
internationalists headed by Lenin and the centrist, Kautskian majority. Lenin
organised a “Zimmerwald left” group, but even in this only the Bolshevik Party
held a consistent Marxist position.
Overall, the conference decisions were vague and semipacifist in character.
The conference adopted a manifesto, drafted by Trotsky, which recognised that
the world war was an imperialist one; it condemned the “socialists” who had voted
war credits and had taken part in bourgeois governments; it called on the European
workers to launch a struggle against the war and for a peace without annexations
or indemnities.
For the significance of the Zimmerwald Conference see Lenin’s articles “The
First Step” and “Revolutionary Marxists at the International Socialist Conference,
September 5-8, 1915” (Collected Works, Vol. 21).n
On the Emancipation of Women

The persistence of gender inequality in the most advanced capitalist
societies gives the lie to the idea that women’s liberation is possible
within the framework of capitalism. Today, with the “gender gap” widening
and women, especially in the Third World, bearing the brunt of the capitalist
neoliberal offensive against the working class as a whole, the correctness
of the Marxist analysis of women’s oppression as a cornerstone of class
society and its revolutionary approach to achieving women’s liberation is
clearer than ever before.
There are enormous lessons to be learnt about the path towards women’s
liberation from both the positive and negative experiences in Soviet history.
The progress achieved by the Bolsheviks, as well as the defeats inflicted
on women during the subsequent Stalinist counterrevolution, demonstrate
the absolute correctness of the Marxist analysis that because women’s
oppression is rooted in the family as the basic unit of class society, the
liberation of women will require not only their complete re-integration into
social production, but also the socialisation of all of the functions of the
family.
Having overthrown capitalist property relations, granted women full legal
equality, begun the process of socialising domestic labour (albeit with
major limitations), and consciously striven to eradicate the backward social
attitudes and ideological justifications for women’s second-class status,
the Bolsheviks’ program for women’s liberation remains the most radical
yet seen.
Centred on works and speeches by V.I. Lenin, this collection also contains
numerous appendices presenting material by Leon Trotsky, from the
Bolsheviks’ program, Comintern documents, and so on. On the
Emancipation of Women documents the main ideas, debates and
experiences in the Bolsheviks’ struggle for the emancipation of women,
and is therefore essential reading for serious socialists and feminists.
