Huey P. Newton

In Defense of Self
Defense
The Black Panther, July 3, 1967
Historically, the power structure has demanded that Black leaders cater
to their desires and to the ends of the imperialistic racism of the
oppressor. The power structure has endorsed those black leaders who
have reduced themselves to nothing more than apologizing parrots.
They have divided the so-called black leaders within the political arena.
The oppressors’ sponsor radio programs, give space in their racist
newspapers, and have shown them the luxury only enjoyed by the
oppressor. The black leaders serve the oppressor by purposely keeping
the people submissive and passive — non-violent. At any moment that
these so-called black leaders respond to the cries of the suffering and
downtrodden, unemployed and welfare recipients who hunger for
liberation by any means necessary.
Historically there have been a few black men who have rejected the
handouts of the oppressor and have refused to spread the oppressor’s
treacherous principles of deceit, gradual indoctrination and
brainwashing, and who have refused to indulge in the criminal activity
of teaching submission, fear, and love for an enemy who hates the very
color black and is determined to commit genocide on an international
scale.
There has always existed in the black colony of Afro-America a
fundamental difference over which tactics from the broad spectrum of
alternatives black people should employ in their struggle for national
liberation.
One side of this difference contends that black people are in the
peculiar position where in order to gain acceptance into the
“mainstream” of American life they must employ no tactic that will make

the oppressor whites angry. This view holds that black people constitute
a hopeless minority and that salvation for black people lies in developing
brotherly relations. There are certain tactics that are taboo. Violence
against the oppressor must be avoided at all costs, because the oppressor
will retaliate with superior violence. So black people may protest but not
protect. They can complain but not cut and shoot. In short, black people
must at all costs remain non-violent.
On the other side of the difference, we find that the point of departure
is the principle that the oppressor has no rights that the oppressed is
bound to respect. Kill the slavemaster, destroy him utterly, move against
him with implacable fortitude. Break his oppressive power by any means
necessary. Men who have stood before the black masses and
recommended this response to the oppression have been held in fear by
the oppressor. The blacks in the colony who were wed to the non-violent
alternative could not relate to the advocates of implacable opposition to
the oppressor. Because the oppressor always prefers to deal with the less
radical — i.e., less dangerous — spokesmen for his subjects. He would
prefer that his subjects had no spokesmen at all, or better yet, he wishes
to speak for them himself. Unable to do this practically, he does the next
best thing and endorses spokesmen who will allow him to speak through
them to the masses. Paramount against his imperatives is to see to it that
implacable spokesmen are never allowed to communicate their message
to the masses. Their oppressor will resort to any means necessary to
silence the implacable.
The oppressor, the endorsed spokesmen, and the implacables form
the three points of a triangle of death. The oppressor looks upon the
endorsed spokesmen as a tool to use against the implacable and to keep
the masses passive within the acceptable limits of the tactics he is
capable of containing. The endorsed spokesmen look upon the
oppressor as a guardian angel who can always be depended upon to
protect them from the wrath of the implacables, while he looks upon the
implacable as a dangerous and irresponsible madmen who, by angering
the oppressor, will certainly provoke a bloodbath in which they
themselves might get washed away. The implacable view both the
oppressors and the endorsed leaders as his deadly enemies. If anything,
he has a more profound hatred for the endorsed leaders than he has for
the oppressor himself, because the implacables know that they can deal

with the oppressor only after they have driven the endorsed spokesmen
off the scene.
Historically, the endorses spokesmen have always held the upper
hand on the implacables. In Afro-American history, there are shining
brief moments when the implacable have outmaneuvered the oppressor
and the endorsed spokesmen and gained the attention of the black
masses. The black masses, recognizing the implacables in the depths of
their despair, respond magnetically to the implacables and bestow a
devotion and loyalty to them that frightens the oppressor and endorsed
spokesmen into a panic-stricken frenzy and they leap into a rash act —
murder, imprisonment, or exile — to silence the implacables and to get
their show back onto the road.
The masses of black people have always been deeply intrenched and
involved in the basic necessities of life. They have not had time to
abstract their situation. Abstractions come only with leisure. The people
have not had the luxury of leisure. Therefore the people have been very
aware of the true definition of politics: Politics are merely the desire of
individuals and groups to satisfy first their basic needs: food, shelter and
clothing, and security for themselves and their loves ones. The black
leaders endorsed by the power structure have attempted to sell the
people the simple-minded theory that politics is holding political office;
being able to move into a $40,000 home; being able to sit near
whitepeople in a restaurant (while in fact the black masses have not been
able to pay the rent on a $40.00 rat-infested hovel).
The black leaders have led the community to believe that brutality and
force could be ended by subjecting the people to this very force of selfsacrificing demonstrations. The black people realize brutality and force
can only be inflicted if there is submission. The community has not
responded in the past or in the present to the absurd and erroneous,
deceitful tactics of so-called legitimate black leaders. The community
realizes that force and brutality can only be eliminated by counter force
through self defense. Leaders who have recommended these tactics have
never had the support and followership of the downtrodden black
masses who comprise the bulk of the community. Grassroots — the
downtrodden of the black community, even though they rejected the
handpicked hankerchief heads endorsed by the power structure, the

people have not had the academic or administrative knowledge to form
themselves in a long resistance to the brutality.
Marcus Garvey and Malcolm X were the two black men of the
twentieth century who posed an implacable challenge to both the
oppressor and the endorsed spokesmen that could be dealt with in no
other way than precisely in the foul manner recorded by history.
Malcolm, in our time, stood on the threshold with the oppressor and the
endorsed spokesmen in a bag that they couldn’t get out of. Malcolm,
implacable to the ultimate degree, held out to the black masses the
historical, stupendous victory of black collective salvation and liberation
from the chains of the oppressor and the treacherous embrace of the
endorsed spokesmen. Only with the gun were the black masses denied
this victory. But they learned from Malcolm that with the gun, they can
recapture their dreams and bring them into reality.
The heirs of Malcolm now stand millions strong on their corner of the
triangle, facing the racist dog oppressor and the soulless endorsed
spokesmen. The heirs of Malcolm have picked up the gun. And taking
first things first, are moving to expose the endorsed spokesmen for the
black masses to see them for what they are and always have been. The
choice offered by the heirs of Malcolm to the endorsed spokesmen is to
repudiate the oppressor and crawl back to their people and earn a
speedy reprieve or face a merciless, speedy and most timely execution
for treason and being too wrong for too long.
