De La Salle University–Dasmariñas
College of Liberal Arts and Communication
Social Sciences Department

Symbols, Struggle, and Stagnation: The Role of the
PFLP in the Palestinian National Movement

A Term Paper
Presented to
Prof. Allen Casey Gumiran
Social Sciences Department
College of Liberal Arts and Communication
De La salle University-Dasmarinas
by
Caritativo, E.D & Manguera, L.A.

In Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements in
Geopolitics and Development

May 2025

I. General Introduction
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is among the longest-standing and most
complex geopolitical conflicts of the modern period, propelled by cross-cutting
nationalisms, land, and historic grievance. The conflict was further heightened
following the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, which led to the displacement of hundreds
of thousands of Palestinians, a past recalled by the Palestinians as the Nakba,
or "catastrophe" (Khalidi, 2020). Over the subsequent decades, the conflict
evolved through war, peace negotiations, and intermittent violence, and it
shaped the politics of the Middle East. Over this course, various Palestinian
groups were established with their own distinct ideologies and strategies for
realizing Palestinian self-rule and statehood.

The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) was founded in
1967 by Palestinian Christian physician and former member of the Arab
Nationalist Movement (ANM) George Habash (Sayigh, 1997). The PFLP quickly
became a prominent Marxist-Leninist party advocated the liberation of Palestine
through armed struggle and revolutionary socialism shortly after its inception.
Unlike other Palestinian factions that engaged in diplomatic diplomacy, the PFLP
emphasized militant struggle and sought to locate the Palestinian struggle within
global anti-imperialist and socialist movements. This ideological foundation
positioned the PFLP as a radical political alternative within the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) and in the broader Palestinian national movement.

Historically, the PFLP was formed as a response to Arab countries' loss
during the 1967 Six-Day War and Israel's occupation of Palestinian territory. The
organization criticized the state of Israel's legitimacy and opposed any peace
treaty that did not ensure the full liberation of Palestine. The PFLP vision was for
a single democratic state where Arabs and Jews coexisted with equal rights,
diametrically opposite to the two-state solution embraced by other Palestinian
movements (Hroub, 2006). The hardline stance led to the PFLP's controversial
reputation in Palestinian society and internationally.

The PFLP rose to international fame with its creative use of "propaganda
of the deed" tactics, including a series of high-profile airplane hijackings and
bombings during the late 1960s and early 1970s. They were designed to
universalize the Palestinian struggle and challenge Western and Israeli
hegemony (Sayigh, 1997). While these activities increased the exposure of the
PFLP, they also led to being labeled a terror organization by countries such as
the United States, the European Union, Canada, and Japan (US Department of
State, 2023). This has created a problem for the PFLP in terms of engaging
diplomatically and impacted how individuals around the world view the
Palestinian liberation movement.

Though its violent methods have been denounced, the PFLP has played a
significant role in Palestinian political and resistance rhetoric. The PFLP has
consistently spurned peace treaties such as the Oslo Accords as Palestinian

compromises of sovereignty and rights (Hroub, 2006). The PFLP continues to
advocate armed struggle and revolutionary change instead, and staying afloat
despite shifting regional politics and internal Palestinian fissiparous politics. Its
military wing, the Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades, on the other hand, remains active
within Gaza and the West Bank, pointing towards the ongoing challenge of
achieving peace and stability.

The PFLP is an important, albeit problematic, chapter in Palestinian nationalist
history. Its Marxist-Leninist theory, commitment to armed struggle, and
internationalist outlook distinguish it from other Palestinian groups. To make
sense of the PFLP's origins, ideology, and role within the broader IsraeliPalestinian conflict, one has to understand the politics of Palestinian resistance
and the sophistication of Middle Eastern self-determination.

II. Related Literature and Other Studies
A. The Genesis of Radicalism
In December 1967, George Habash formed the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) in response to the profound and traumatic
changes affecting the Arab world following the Six-Day War. As a Palestinian
Christian and physician, Habash was deeply influenced by the trauma of the
Nakba in 1948 and his political development in the Arab Nationalist
Movement. The establishment of the PFLP marked a firm shift towards
Marxist-Leninist ideology in Palestinian resistance. Its initial manifestos

proclaimed a vision of prolonged people's war, merging class struggle with
anti-colonial liberation. The leadership of the organization contended that
Arab regime failure and the disintegration of pan-Arab unity made it
mandatory to have a revolutionary vanguard committed to armed struggle,
not merely against Israel but also against Western imperialism and
reactionary Arab regimes (Miller, 2023). The PFLP's intransigent position soon
distinguished it from Fatah, the ruling group in the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO), that was more receptive to pragmatic nationalism and
negotiations. The PFLP drew its popular base from urban intellectuals,
university students, and refugees, especially in Jordan and Lebanon, where
it also began social and educational institutions to establish grassroots
legitimacy (European Council on Foreign Relations [ECFR], 2023). The
group's extremism and autonomy of operations, however, soon began to
create tension with Middle Eastern powers, most dramatically during the runup to Black September in Jordan in 1970.

B. International Operations and "Propaganda of the Deed"
The PFLP became infamous for its "propaganda of the deed," high visibility
acts of violence meant to garner international attention to the Palestinian
cause. Wadie Haddad's External Operations department coordinated a
campaign of hijackings, bombings, and attacks aimed at Western countries
around the globe. In 1968, the PFLP hijacked an El Al flight to Algeria
establishing a precedent for hostage taking as a bargaining tool to further

release Palestinian detainees and obtain international media attention (Miller,
2023). The hijacking of 1970 at Dawson's Field with four aircraft hijacked and
flown to a remote airstrip in Jordan eventually developed into a standoff that
caused the Jordanian monarchy to crack down on Palestinian organizations.
The 1972 Lod Airport massacre, which it carried out with the Japanese Red
Army, showed that the PFLP was capable of forming international alliances
for its operations. These raids accomplished their goal of internationalizing
the Palestinian issue, but drew international condemnation as well as
designation of the PFLP as a terrorist organisation by the United States, the
European Union and other states (U.S. Department of the Treasury, 2024).
By the late 1970s, the success of these strategies ebbed as the group was
facing

increasing

pressure

from

regional

actors

and

international

counterterrorism initiatives, particularly after the passing away of Haddad,
who was extensively held responsible by Israeli intelligence (Miller, 2023).
C. Relationships with International Revolutionary Movements
Since its founding, the PFLP has regarded the Palestinian resistance as an
integrated part of the wider international struggle against imperialism and
capitalism. In the Cold War period, the organization benefited from the
sponsorship of the Soviet Union and China, both of which perceived
Palestinian resistance as constituting a component of their ideological rivalry
with the West (ECFR, 2023).

The PFLP also forged close working relationships with a variety of left-wing
militant organizations, such as the Japanese Red Army, Germany's Red Army
Faction, and figures like "Carlos the Jackal." These ties were not just tactical
in nature but were indicative of an intense ideological commitment to
internationalism and revolutionary solidarity. PFLP camps in Lebanon
became a center for international violence, and its membership attended
international meetings of anti-imperialist groups. The deterioration of the
global left and the ascendancy of political Islam during the 1980s and 1990s
also chipped away at these networks, delegitimizing the ideological claims of
the PFLP (Miller 2023; ECFR 2023).
D. The Oslo Accords and PFLP's Rejection
The Oslo Accords in the 1990s had a watershed effect on Palestinian
politics and drove the PFLP more to the periphery. The organization was
an outspoken and bitter critic of Oslo, with its members believing that the
accords represented a surrender to Israeli and Western pressures and a
sell-out of top Palestinian rights, such as the right of return for the
refugees. The PFLP refused to participate in the PA governments created
by Oslo and supported continued armed struggle and appeal for one
(secular) democratic state in historic Palestine (ECFR, 2023). The boycott
was ideological, based on the group’s Marxist-Leninist commitment to
unyielding struggle, and strategic, out of concern that Oslo security
cooperation could criminalize resistance, and divide the Palestinian
movement. This process therefore helped to isolate the PFLP within the

PLO as movements like Hamas was to grow in popularity by claiming to be
the authentic voice of resistance (Miller 2023).
D. Current Activities and Challenges
Today, the PFLP is still the second-largest of the PLO factions but its power
has largely been lost. The fall of the Soviet Union deprived the party of a key
source of funding, and the emergence of Islamist parties altered the political
equilibrium in Palestinian politics. The PFLP's militant wing, the Abu Ali
Mustafa Brigades, still exists in Gaza and sections of the West Bank and tends
to act in collaboration with Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. The
organization has claimed authorship of a variety of attacks in the 21st
century, such as the assassination of Israeli Tourism Minister Rehavam Ze'evi
in 2001 and the 2014 Jerusalem synagogue attack. Of late, the PFLP has
been involved in combined operations during large-scale escalations,
including the October 7, 2023, attacks in southern Israel, which attracted
global criticism and resumed examination from Western governments (NGO
Monitor, 2024; U.S. Department of the Treasury, 2024).

The PFLP encounters a multitude of difficulties in the modern day. Its
Marxist, secular ideology lost most of its appeal in an area now shaped by
political Islam as the language of resistance. Fostart, the organization is
financially stretched, having lost Soviet sponsorship and PLO funding, the
latter of which was suspended in 2016. International sanctions and antiterrorist regulations further limited it from raising funds, and the group

increasingly turned to Iranian sponsorship and diaspora contributions. In
2024, the US and Canada placed new sanctions on PFLP financiers for
sending millions of dollars via cryptocurrency and other hidden channels
(U.S. Department of the Treasury, 2024). There have also been restrictions on
organizational leadership capability within the group; Ahmad Sa'adat, who
has been the General Secretary of the PFLP since 2001, has been in Israeli
prisons since 2006, and limited capability for communication has led to
internal rifts and divergences of strategy (ECFR, 2023).

The PFLP's legitimacy has also been challenged by charges that it has
militarized Palestinian civil society. In 2022, the Israeli government declared
several Palestinian NGOs to be fronts for the PFLP, a step which was strongly
contested by global human rights groups but which nonetheless placed the
group under greater scrutiny for its social and political activities (NGO
Monitor, 2024). The PFLP has a presence within the Palestinian National
Council and youth and women's committees within refugee camps but is
increasingly eclipsed by more extensive Islamist social infrastructure.

Overall, the PFLP's historical importance derives from its pioneering of
transnational armed struggle and continued critique of political compromise
with Israel. Although its power has diminished with the decline of the old
regional order and generational change, the organization remains a badge of
unyielding opposition for a portion of the disillusioned Palestinian population

with the Palestinian Authority and Hamas. The future of the PFLP will hinge
on whether it can ideologically evolve, access sustainable means, and
navigate the intricacies of Palestinian politics in the new century. Its own
legacy is securely set, though, as a case study in the potentialities and
limitations of revolutionary violence in contemporary Middle East.

III. Course Implication
The development and history of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine (PFLP) provide a rich framework through which to study the interaction
of conflict, security, and development—central AB International Development
themes. The organization arose in a background of statelessness, chronic
conflict, and regional insecurity, in which classic development was overpowered
by a struggle centered on liberation. The PFLP's resistance to diplomatic
settlement initiatives such as the Oslo Accords and its consistent armed struggle
demonstrate a conviction that true development and self-governance can never
be achieved under occupation and foreign control (Hroub, 2006; Miller, 2023).
This demonstrates the conflict between peacebuilding actions and local
conceptions of justice and sovereignty.

The PFLP's activism also demonstrates the difficulties in state-building
and governance amidst strong non-state actors. Although it was not officially a
part of the Palestinian Authority government structure, the PFLP held
considerable power through its militant, social, and education wings. It operated

as a de facto government in various refugee camps, especially in Lebanon and
Gaza, where it enjoyed street credibility (European Council on Foreign Relations,
2023). This complicates typical development narratives, which tend to presume
the existence of a legitimate and centralized state actor as a pre-condition for
progress.

Ideology and identity are centrally located in the PFLP's revolutionary
platform, making it a rich case study of resistance in development contexts.
Marxist-Leninist ideology is the theoretical foundation of the PFLP, and it
combined class struggle and national liberation as aims, aiming to counter both
zoning occupation and global capitalism (Sayigh, 1997). Its coordination with
international left movements such as the Japanese Red Army and Red Army
Faction reflects how transnational ideological solidarity informed its behavior
and legitimacy (Miller, 2023). These ideological imperatives inform not only the
means of resistance, but also the visions of development and governance for such
groups.

The PFLP's decline highlights how changing global ideology and regional
politics impact non-state actors and their capacity. The fall of the Soviet Union
eliminated one of the principal sources of ideological and financial backing, while
the emergence of Islamist movements and donor conditionalities re-shaped the
Palestine political development space (ECFR, 2023). In addition, contemporary
counterterrorism policies, including financial sanctions and organizational

proscriptions, have suppressed the PFLP's activities and diplomatically isolated
it (U.S. Department of the Treasury, 2024). This reflects how global security
regimes can shape the development trajectories of both state and non-state
actors.

For students of AB International Development, the PFLP provides valuable
lessons on the intricacy of resistance politics, the strength of ideology, and the
resilience of non-state actors in influencing development outcomes. The case
illustrates the shortcomings of top-down paradigms and the need for situating
local histories, identities, and political realities at the center of development
frameworks. In areas of continued conflict and occupation, there is a need to
understand groups such as the PFLP to develop informed, context-specific, and
sustainable development policies.

V. Commentary
The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) is still one of the
more complex and contentious groups in the wider Palestinian resistance
movement. Its unyielding position and militant tactics have very often placed it
in conflict with global norms and changing expectations on the part of the
Palestinian people. Personally, examining the PFLP's legacy is challenging—while
their rhetoric on liberation and equality resonates with anti-colonial narratives,
their methods and ideological rigidity often overshadow their goals. It raises

difficult questions: Can armed resistance still be justified in the 21st century?
And if so, to what extent?

From a critical standpoint, the PFLP’s impact has been both symbolic and
divisive. Their dismissal of the two-state solution and their dream of one
democratic state may seem utopian, but it has no practical avenues. Their
demands for armed struggle, although based on their Marxist-Leninist ideology,
have not come with practical advances toward Palestinian statehood. At worst,
it has isolated them further from both the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) and the international diplomatic community (Hroub, 2006).

Although the PFLP did manage to internationalize the Palestinian issue in
the 1970s using its sensational hijackings and bombings, these same actions
ultimately had a rebound effect. They elicited severe criticism from the world
powers and served to cement the perception of Palestinian resistance as being
one with terrorism. In doing so, the PFLP helped to delegitimize the movement
they sought to bring into prominence (Sayigh, 1997). This paradox is perhaps
one of their biggest failures—to opt for fame over long-term political momentum.

In re-evaluating its effectiveness, it is evident that the PFLP has not
succeeded much in its adaptation. Other groups, such as Fatah and Hamas, for
all their own shortcomings, have at least participated in political procedures or
been responsive to shifting geopolitical realities. The PFLP, on the other hand,

seems stuck in a moment in time—still using models that were maybe more
salient in the Cold War era. Their armed wing, Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades,
continues to exist, though their impact is overshadowed by more powerful
players in the region (International Crisis Group, 2022).

One

should

also

weigh

the

moral

consequences

of

their

plan.

Revolutionary violence may be historically justifiable, particularly in situations
of occupation and repression, but in the interconnected, legally formalized world
of the present day, such tactics risk being a step too far and into war crimes.
The Geneva Conventions, for instance, ban attacks on non-combatants—a
principle that the PFLP's methods have not always adhered to. Accordingly, the
organization's actions are routinely denounced under international law (United
Nations General Assembly, 2004).

In addition, the PFLP's ideological basis—though originally inspiring to
some of the leftist movements—has become progressively out of touch. The world
left has developed to adopt nonviolence, diversity, and transnational justice
movements. The PFLP's adherence to militarism and its antiquated Marxist
jargon renders it disconnected from today's social justice struggles, even among
those sympathetic in the West (Gunning, 2008).

The international community's attitude towards the PFLP is strongly defined by
this history. Countries like the United States, Canada, and members of the

European Union have labeled it a terrorist group (US Department of State, 2023).
This designation not only restricts the PFLP in finding allies but also impacts the
wider Palestinian cause by placing a cloud over legitimate calls for selfdetermination. Alas, the group's recent history has also provided a handy
rationale for some states to eschew more serious engagement with the
Palestinian question entirely.

All the same, one should not reduce the PFLP to caricature. They are a
strand of Palestinian resistance that demands dignity and will not accept a
"lesser" peace—a peace that provides economic relief without substantive
sovereignty. Their criticisms of international failures of the Oslo Accords are
legitimate (Hroub, 2006). Nevertheless, idealism without a clear and fair plan
has a way of degenerating into violence or irrelevance, and the PFLP appears
trapped between the two.

In looking back at their legacy, it is possible to see that the PFLP is both a
prisoner and a product of its time. Their unshakeable vision for justice can be
admired, but their inability to deal positively with changing political
circumstances has made them irrelevant. Peace, if and when it arrives, will
probably need a new type of resistance—a resistance built upon diplomacy,
inclusivity, and law, and not merely ideology and weaponry.

Finally, the PFLP remains a symbol of resistance at its most extreme. It is
a tale of passion, anger, and rejection—but one of lost opportunities and moral
uncertainty as well. Today, their ongoing militancy serves the Palestinian
struggle not at all. If anything, it might harm it. The story of the PFLP, then, is
not one of what they struggled against, but also of what they would not modify—
and in that reluctance is the tragedy of their potential and their collapse.

Bibliography:
European Council on Foreign Relations. (2023, July 3). Popular Front for the
Liberation

of

Palestine

(PFLP). https://ecfr.eu/special/mapping_palestinian_politics/popular_fr
ont_for_the_liberation_of_palestine/

Gunning, J. (2008). Hamas in politics: Democracy, religion, violence. Columbia
University Press. https://research.aber.ac.uk/en/publications/hamasin-politics-democracy-religion-violence

Hroub, K. (2006). Hamas: Political thought and practice. Institute for Palestine
Studies. https://ciaotest.cc.columbia.edu/olj/jps/vol35-140/vol35140_b.pdf

International Crisis Group. (2022). Israel/Palestine: A new approach to conflict
resolution. https://www.crisisgroup.org

Miller, E. J. (2023, March 3). Habash founds the Popular Front for the Liberation
of

Palestine. EBSCO

Research

Starters. https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/history/habashfounds-popular-front-liberation-palestine

NGO Monitor. (2024, January 30). PFLP involvement in the October 7
atrocities. https://ngo-monitor.org/reports/pflp-involvement-in-theoctober-7-atrocities/

Sayigh, Y. (1997). Armed struggle and the search for state: The Palestinian
national

movement,

1949-1993.

Oxford

University

Press. https://www.proquest.com/docview/203252857?sourcetype=Sch
olarly%20Journals

United Nations General Assembly. (2004). Advisory opinion on the legal
consequences of the construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory. https://www.icj-cij.org/en/case/131

U.S. Department of State. (2023). Foreign terrorist
organizations. https://www.state.gov/foreign-terrorist-organizations/

U.S. Department of the Treasury. (2024, October 15). United States and Canada
target key international fundraiser for Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine
releases/jy2646

(PFLP). https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-
