ON THE IDEOLOGY OF
THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY
BY LldriEge Cleaver

The following article introduces a new series of
articles on the ideology of the Black Panther
Party by our Minister of Information, Eldridge
Cleaver.

"ONE OF THE GREAT CONTRIBUTIONS OF HUEY P.
NEWTON IS THAT HE
GAVE THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY A FIRM IDEOLOGICAL FOUNDATION
THAT FREES US FROM
IDEOLOGICAL FLUNKEYISMANDOPENS UP THE
PATH TO THE FUTURE ."
Eldridge Cleaver
Minister of Information
Black Panther Party
U.S.A.

ON THE IDEOLOGY OF THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY
(Part 1)
By Eldridge Cleaver
We have said : the ideology of the Black Panther Party
is the historical experience of Black people and the wisdom
gained by Black people in their 400 year long struggle
against the system of racist oppression and economic
exploitation in Babylon, interpreted through the prism of
the Marxist-Leninist analysis by our Minister of Defense,
Huey P . Newton.
However, we must place heavy emphasis upon the last
part of that definition -- `interpreted. .. by our Minister
of Defense . .' . The world of Marxism-Leninism has become
a jungle of opinion in which conflicting interpretations,
from Right Revisionism to Left Dogmatism,foist off their
philosophies
as revolutionary
and blind
reactionary
Marxism-Leninism . Around the world and in every nation
people, all who call themselves Marxist-Leninists, are at
each other's throats . Such a situation presents serious
problems to a young party, such as ours, that is still
in the process of refining its ideology.
When we say that we are Marxist-Leninists, we mean
that we have studied and understood the classical principles
of scientific socialism and that we have adapted these
principles to our own situation for ourselves . However, we
do not move with a closed mind to new ideas or information .
At the same time, we know that we must rely upon our own
brains in solving ideological problems as they relate to us .
For too long Black people have relied upon the analyses
and ideological perspectives of others . Our struggle has
reached a point now where it would be absolutely suicidal
for us to continue this posture of dependency . No other
people in the world are in the same position as we are,
and no other people in the world can get us out of it except
ourselves . There are those who are all too willing to do our
thinking for us, even if it gets us killed. However, they are
not willing to follow through and do our dying for us . If
thoughts bring about our deaths, let them at least be our
own thoughts, so that we will have broken, once and for all,
with the flunkeyism of dying for every cause and every
error -- except our own.

One of the great contributions of Huey P . Newton is
that he gave the Black Panther Party a firm ideological
foundation that frees us from ideological flunkeyism and
opens up the path to the future -- a future to which we must
provide new ideological formulations to fit our ever changing situation,
Much -- most -- of the teachings of Huey P . Newton are
unknown to the people because Huey has been placed in a
position where it is impossible for him to really communicate with us . And much that he taught while he was free
has gotten distorted and watered down precisely because
the Black Panther Party has been too hung up in relating
to the courts and trying to put on a good face in order to
help lawyers convince juries of the justice of our cause.
This whole court hang-up has created much confusion .
For instance, many people confuse the Black Panther
Party with the Free Huey Movement or the many other
mass activities that we have been forced to indulge in in
order to build mass support for our comrades who have
gotten captured by the pigs. We are absolutely correct
in indulging in such mass activity . But we are wrong when
we confuse our mass line with our party line.
Essentially, what Huey did was to provide the ideology
and the methodology for organizing the Black Urban Lumpenproletariat . Armed with this ideological perspective and
method, Huey transformed the Black lumpenproletariat
from the forgotten people at the bottom of society into
the vanguard of the proletariat .
There is a lot of confusion over whether we are members

of the Working Class or whether we are Lump enproletariat .
It is necessary to confront this confusion, because it has a
great deal to do with the strategy and tactics that we follow
and with our strained relations with the White radicals
_from the oppressor section of Babylon .
Some so-called Marxist-Leninists will attack us for
what we have to say, but that is a good thing and not a
bad thing because some people call themselves MarxistLeninists who are the downright enemies of Black people.
Later for them . We want them to step boldly forward,
as they will do -- blinded by their own stupidity and racist
arrogance -- so that it will be easier for us to deal with
them in the future.
We make these criticisms in a fraternal spirit of how

some Marxist-Leninists apply the classical principles to
the specific situation that exists in the United States because we believe in the need for a unified revolutionary
movement in the United States, a movement that is informed by the revolutionary principles of scientific ,socialism, Huey P o Newton says that "power is the ability to define
phenomena and make it act in a desired manner," And we
need power, desperately, to counter the power of the pigs
that now bears so heavily upon us e
Ideology is a comprehensive definition of a status quo
that takes into account both the history and the future
of that status quo and serves as the social glue that holds
a people together and through which a people relate to
the world and other groups of people in the world. The
correct ideology is an invincible weapon against the oppressor in our struggle for freedom and liberation .
Marx defined the epoch of the bourgeoisie and laid bare
the direction
of the
Proletarian future . He analyzed
Capitalism and defined the method of its doom. VIOLENT
REVOLUTION
BY THE PROLETARIAT AGAINST THE
BOURGEOIS STATE APPARATUS OF CLASS OPPRESSION
AND REPRESSION, REVOLUTIONARY VIOLENCE AGAINST
THE
COUNTER-REVOLUTIONARY
CLASS VIOLENCE
PERPETRATED THROUGH THE SPECIAL REPRESSIVE
FORCE OF THE ARMED TENTICLES OF THE STATE,
This great definition by Marx and Engels became the
mightiest weapon in the hands of oppressed people in
the history of ideology . It marks a gigantic advance for
all mankind . And since Marx's time, his definition has
been strengthened, further elaborated, illumined, and further
refined,
But Marxism has never really dealt with the United
States of America . There have been some very nice attempts . People have done the best that they know how,
However, in the past, Marxist-Leninists in the United
States have relied too heavily upon foreign, imported analyses and have seriously distorted the realities of the
American scene. We might say that the Marxism-Leninism
of the past belongs to the gestation period of MarxismLeninism in the United States, and that now is the time
when a new, strictly American ideological synthesis will
arise,
springing up from the hearts and souls of the
oppressed people inside Babylon, and uniting these people
and hurling them mightily, from the force of their struggle,
into the future. The swiftly developing revolution in America
is like the gathering of a mighty storm, and nothing can
stop that storm from finally bursting, inside America,
washing away the pigs of the power structure and all their
foul, oppressive works . And the children of the pigs and
the oppressed people will dance and spit upon the common
graves of these pigs .
There are some Black people in the United States who are
absolutely happy, who do not feel themselves to be oppressed,
and who think that they are free. Some even believe that the
President wouldn't lie, and that he is more or less an
honest man; that Supreme Court decisions were almost
written by god in person; that the Police are Guardians
of the Law; and that people who do not have jobs are just
plain lazy and good-for nothing and should be severely
punished. These are like crabs that must be left to boil
a little longer in the pot of oppression before they will be
ready and willing to relate. But the overwhelming majority
of Black people are uptight, know that they are oppressed
and not free; and they wouldn't believe Nixon if he confessed
to being a pig; they don't relate to the Supreme Court or
any other court; and they know that the racist pig cops
are their sworn enemies . As for poverty, they know what
it is all about.
These millions of Black people have no political representation,- they are unorganized, and they do not own or
control any of the natural resources ; they neither own nor
control any of the industrial machinery, and their daily
life is a hustle to make it by any means necessary in the
struggle to survive .
Every Black person knows that the wind may change
at any given moment and that the Lynch Mob, made up of
White members of the "Working Class", might come
breathing down his neck if not kicking down his door.
It is because of these factors that when we begin to talk
about being Marxist-Leninists, we must be very careful
to make it absolutely clear just what we are talking about.
On the subject of racism, Marxism-Leninism offers
us very little assistance. In fact, there is much evidence
that Marx and Engels were themselves racists -- just like
their White brothers and sisters of their era, and just as
many Marxist-Leninists of our own time are also racists.

Historically, Marxism-Leninism has been an outgrowth
of European problems and it has been primarily preoccupied
with finding solutions to European problems .
With the founding of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea in 1948 and the People's Republic of China in
1949, something new was injected into Marxism-Leninism,
and it ceased to be just a narrow, exclusively European
phenomenon . Comrade Kim il Sung and Comrade Mao
Tse-tung applied the classical principles of MarxismLeninism to the conditions in their own countries and
thereby made the ideology into something useful for their
people . But they rejected that part of the analysis that was
not beneficial to them and had only to do with the welfare
of Europe.
Given the racist history of the United States, it is very
difficult for Black people to comfortably call themselves
Marxist-Leninists or anything else that takes its name from
White people. It's like praying to Jesus, a White man.
W e must emphasize the fact that Marx and Lenin didn't
invent Socialism . They only added their contributions, enriching the doctrine, just as many others did before them
and after them . And we must remember that Marx and
Lenin didn't organize the Black Panther Party . Huey P .
Newton and Bobby Seale did.
Not until we reach Fanon do we find a major Marxistabout
Leninist theoretician who was primarily concerned
the problems of Black people, wherever they may be
found . And even Fanon, in his published works, was primarily focused on Africa . It is only indirectly that his
works are beneficial to Afro-Americans . It is just easier
to relate to Fanon because he is clearly free of that racist
bias that blocks out so much about the Black man in the
hands of Whites who are primarily interested in themselves
and the problems of their own people. But even though we
are able to relate heavily to Fanon, he has not given us
the last word on applying the Marxist-Leninist analysis
to our problems inside the United States. No one is going
to do this for us because no one can. We have to do it
ourselves, and until we do, we are going to be uptight.
We must take the teachings of Huey P . Newton as our
foundation and go from there. Any other course will bring
us to a sorry and regrettable end .
Fanon delivered a devastating attack upon Marxism5

Leninism for its narrow preoccupation with Europe and
the affairs and salvation of White folks, while lumping
all third world peoples into the category of the Lumpenproletariat and then forgetting them there; Fanon unearthed the category of the Lumpenproletariat and began
to deal with it, recognizing that vast majorities of the
colonized people fall into that category. It is because
of the fact that Black people in the United States are also
colonized that Fanon's analysis is so relevant to us .
After studying Fanon, Huey P . Newton and Bobby Seale
began to apply his analysis of colonized people to Black
people in the United States . They adopted the Fanonian
perspective, but they gave it a uniquely Afro-American
content,
Just as we must make the distinctions between the mother
country and the colony when dealing with Black people
and White people as a whole, we must also make this
distinction when we deal with the categories of the Working
Class and the Lumpenproletariat .
We have, in the United States, a "Mother Country Working Class" and a "Working Class from the Black Colony" .
We also have a Mother Country Lumpenproletariat and
a Lumpenproletariat from the Black Colony. Inside the
Mother Country, these categories are fairly stable, but
when we look at the Black Colony, we find that the hard
and fast distinctions melt away. This is because of the
leveling effect of the colonial process and the fact that
all Black people are colonized, even if some of them occupy favored positions in the schemes of the Mother Country colonizing exploiters .
There is a difference between the problems of the
Mother Country Working Class and the Working Class
from the Black Colony . There is also a difference between
the Mother Country Lumpen and the Lumpen from the
Black Colony. We have nothing to gain from trying to
smooth over these differences as though they don't exist,
because they are objective facts that must be dealt with.
To make this point clear, we have only to look at the
long and bitter history of the struggles of Black Colony
Workers fighting for democracy inside Mother Country
;Labor Unions.
Historically, we have fallen into the trap of criticizing
mother country labor unions and workers for the racism
as an explanation for the way they treat Black workers,
Of course, they are racist, but this is not the full explanation.
White workers belong to a totally different world than
that of Black workers, They are caught up in a totally
different economic, political, and social reality, and on
the basis of this distinct reality, the pigs of the power
structure and treacherous labor leaders find it very easy
to manipulate them with Babylonian racism,
This complex reality presents us with many problems,
and only through proper analysis can these problems be
solved. The lack of a proper analysis is responsible for
the ridiculous approach to these problems that we find
among Mother Country Marxist-Leninists, And their improper analysis leads them to advocate solutions that are
doomed to failure in advance . The key area of the confusion has to do with falsely assuming the existence
of one All-American Proletariat; one All-American Working Class ; and one All-American Lumpenproletariat,
O .K. We are Lumpen. Right on . The Lumpenproletariat
are all those who have no secure relationship or vested
interest in the means of production and the institutions of
capitalist society . That part of the "Industrial Reserve
Army" held perpetually in reserve; who have never worked
and never will; who can't find a job; who are unskilled and
unfit; who have been displaced by machines, automation,
and cybernation, and were never "retained or invested
with new skills" ; all those on Welfare or receiving State
Aid.
Also the so-called "Criminal Element", those who live
by their wits, existing off that which they rip off, who stick
guns in the faces of businessmen and say `stick'em up',
or `give it up' l Those who don't even want a job, who hate
to work and can't relate to punching some pig's time clock,
who would rather punch a pig in the mouth and rob him than
punch that same pig's time clock and work for him, those
whom Huey P . Newton calls "the illegitimate capitalists" .
In short, all those who simply have been locked out of the
economy and robbed of their rightful social heritage.
But even though we are Lumpen, we are still members
of the Proletariat, a category which theoretically cuts
across national boundaries but which in practice leaves
something to be desired.

CONTRADICTIONS WITHIN THE PROLETARIAT OF THE USA

In both the Mother Country and the Black Colony, the
Working Class is the Right Wing of the Proletariat, and
the Lumpenproletariat is the Left Wing . Within the Working
Class itself, we have a major contradiction between the
Unemployed and the Employed . And we definitely have a
major contradiction between the Working Class and the
accuse the
Some blind
so-called Marxist-Leninists
Lumpen of being parasites upon the Working Class. This
is a stupid charge derived from reading too many of Marx's
footnotes and taking some of his offhand scurrilous remarks for holy writ. In reality, it is accurate to say that
the Working Class, particularly the American Working
Class, is a parasite upon the heritage of mankind, of
which the Lumpen has been totally robbed by the rigged
system of Capitalism which in turn, has thrown the majority of mankind upon the junkheap while it buys off a
percentage with jobs and security .
The Working Class that we must deal with today shows
little resemblance to the Working Class of Marx's day.
In the days of its infancy, insecurity, and instability, the
Working Class was very revolutionary and carried forward
the struggle against the bourgeoisie. But through long and
bitter struggles, the Working Class has made some inroads
into the Capitalist system, carving out a comfortable niche
for itself. The advent of Labor Unions, Collective Bargaining, the Union Shop, Social Security, and other special
protective legislation has castrated the Working Class,
transforming it into the bought-off Labor Movement -a most un-revolutionary, reformist minded movement that
is only interested in higher wages and more job security.
The Labor Movement has abandoned all basic criticism
The George
of the Capitalist system of exploitation itself.
A.
Phillip
Randolphs
may
Meanys, Walter Reuthers, and
correctly be labelled traitors to the proletariat as a whole,
but they accurately reflect and embody the outlook and
aspirations of the Working Class . The Communist Party
of the United States of America, at its poorly attended
meetings, may raise the roof with its proclamations of being
the Vanguard of the Working Class, but the Working Class
itself looks upon the Democratic Party as the legitimate
vehicle of its political salvation.
As a matter of fact, the Working Class of our time has
become a new industrial elite, resembling more the chauvanistic elites of the selfish craft and trade guilds of Marx's
time than the toiling masses ground down in abject poverty .
Every job on the market in the American Economy today
demands as high a complexity of skills as did the jobs
in the elite trade and craft guilds of Marx's time.
In a highly mechanized economy, it cannot be said that
the fantastically high productivity is the product solely
of the Working Class. Machines and computers are not
members of the Working Class, although some spokesmen for the Working Class, particularly some MarxistLeninists, seem to think like machines and computers .
The flames of revolution, which once raged like an
inferno in the heart of the Working Class, in our day
have dwindled into a flickering candle light, only powerful enough to bounce the Working Class back and forth
like a ping pong ball between the Democratic Party and
the Republican Party every four years, never once even
glancing at the alternatives on the Left.
WHO SPEAKS FOR THE LUMPEN PROLETARIAT?
Some Marxist-Leninists are guilty of that class egotism
and hypocrisy often displayed by superior classes to those
beneath them on the social scale. On the one hand, they freely admit that their organizations are specifically designed
to represent the interests of the Working Class . But then
they go beyond that to say that by representing the interests
of the Working Class, they represent the interest of the
Proletariat as a whole. This is clearly not true. This is
a fallacious assumption based upon the egotism of these
organizations and is partly responsible for their miserable
failure to make a revolution in Babylon.
And since there clearly is a contradiction between the
right wing and the left wing of the Proletariat, just as the
right wing has created its own organizations, it is necessary
for the left wing to have its form of organization to represent its interests against all hostile classes -- including
the Working Class,
The contradiction between the Lumpen and the Working
Class is very serious because it even dictates a different
strategy and set of tactics . The students focus their rebellions on the campuses, and the Working Class focuses
its rebellions on the factories and picket lines . But the
Lumpen finds itself in the peculiar position of being unable
to find a job and therefore is unable to attend the Universities . The Lumpen has no choice but to manifest its rebellion in the University of the Streets .
It's very important to recognize that the streets belong
to the Lumpen, and that it is in the streets that the Lumpen
will make their rebellion.
One outstanding characteristic of the liberation struggle
of Black people in the United States has been that most
of the activity has taken place in the streets . This is
because, by and large, the rebellions have been spearheaded by Black Lumpen .
It is because of Black people's lumpen relationship
to the means of production and the institutions of the
society that they are unable to manifest their rebellion
around those means of production and institutions . But this
does not mean that the rebellions that take place in the
streets are not legitimate expressions of an oppressed
people. These are the means of rebellion left open to the
Lumpen.
The Lumpen have been locked outside of the economy.
And when the Lumpen does engage in direct action against
the system of oppression, it is often greeted by hoots and
howls from the spokesmen of the Working Class in chorus
with the mouthpieces of the bourgeoisie. These talkers like
to put down the struggles of the Lumpen as being "spontaneous" (perhaps because they themselves did not order
the actions l), "unorganized", and "chaotic and undirected" .
But these are only prejudiced analyses made from the
narrow perspective of the Working Class. But the Lumpen
moves anyway, refusing to be straight-jacketed or controlled by the tactics dictated by the conditions of life
and the relationship to the means of production of the
Working Class .
The Lumpen finds itself in the position where it is
very difficult for it to manifest its complaints against the
system . The Working Class has the possibility of calling
a strike against the factory and the employer and through
the mechanism of Labor Unions they can have some arbitra10

tion or some process through which its grievances are manifested, Collective bargaining is the way out of the pit of
oppression and exploitation discovered by the Working
Class, but the Lumpen has no opportunity to do any collective bargaining, The Lumpen has no institutionalized focus
in Capitalist society, It has no immediate oppressor except
perhaps the Pig Police with which it is confronted daily .
So that the very conditions of life of the Lumpen dictates
the so-called spontaneous reactions against the system,
and because the Lumpen is in this extremely oppressed
condition, it therefore has an extreme reaction against
the system as a whole . It sees itself as being bypassed
by all of the organizations, even by the Labor Unions,
and even by the Communist Parties that despise it and
look down upon it and consider it to be, in the words of
Karl Marx, the father of Communist Parties, "The Scum_
Layer of the Society" . The Lumpen is forced to create
its own forms of rebellion that are consistent with its
condition in life and with its relationship to the means
of production and the institutions of society . That is, to
strike out at all the structures around it, including at the
reactionary Right Wing of the Proletariat when it gets
in the way of revolution.
The faulty analyses which the ideologies of the Working
Class have made, of the true nature of the Lumpen, are
greatly responsible for the retardation of the development of the revolution in urban situations . It can be said
that the true revolutionaries in the urban centers of
the world have been analyzed out of the revolution by some
Marxist-Leninists .

October 1966 Black Panther
Party Platform and Program

What We Want
What We Believe

1 . We want freedom. We want power to determine the destiny of our
Black Community.
We believe that black people will not be free until we are able to determine our destiny.

2 . We want full employment for our people .
obligated to
We believe that the federal government is responsible and
believe
that if
.
We
give every man employment or a guaranteed income
then
the
employment,
not
give
full
the white American businessmen will
placed
in
and
the
businessmen
be
taken
from
means of production should
and emcan
organize
community
people
of
the
that
the
the community so
ploy all of its people and give a high standard of living .
our Black
3 . We want an end to the robbery by the CAPITAUST of
Community.
We believe that this racist government has robbed us and now we are
demanding the overdue debt of forty acres and two mules. Forty acres
and two mules was promised 100 years ago as restitution for slave labor
and mass murder of black people . We will accept the payment in currency
which will be distributed to our many communities . The Germans are now
aiding the Jews in Israel for the genocide of the Jewish people . The Germans murdered six million Jews . The American racist has taken part in
the slaughter of over fifty million black people ; therefore, we feei that this
is a modest demand that we make .
4. We want decent housing, fit for shelter of human beings .
We believe that if the white landlords will not give decent housing to
our black community, then the housing and the land should be made into
cooperatives so that our community, with government aid, can build and
make decent housing for its people .
5. We want education for our people that exposes the true nature of this
decadent American society. We want education that teaches us our true
history and our role in the present-day society.
We believe in an educational system that will give to our people a knowledge of self. If a man does not have knowledge of himself and his position
in society and the world, then he has little chance to relate to anything
else .

6. We want all black men to be exempt from military service.
We believe that Black people should not be forced to fight in the military service to defend a racist government that does not protect us . We
will not fight and kill other people of color in the world who, like black
people, are being victimized by the white racist government of America.

We will protect ourselves from the force and violence of the racist police
and the racist military, by whatever means necessary.
7. We want an immediate end to POLICE BRUTALITY and MURDER
of black people .
We believe we can end police brutality in our black community by organizing black self-defense groups that are dedicated to defending our
black community from racist police oppression and brutality . The Second
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States gives a right to bear
arms . We therefore believe that all black people should arm themselves
for self-defense .
8. We want freedom for all black men held in federal, state, county
and city prisons and jails.
We believe that all black people should be released from the many
jails and prisons because they have not received a fair and impartial trial.
9. We want all black people when brought to trial to be tried in court by
a jury of their peer group or people from their black communities, as
defined by the Constitution of the United States .
We believe that the courts should follow the United States Constitution
so that black people will receive fair trials . The 14th Amendment of the
U .S . Constitution gives a man a right to be tried by his peer group. A peer
is a person from a similar economic, social, religious, geographical, environmental, historical and racial background . To do this the court will be
forced to select a jury from the black community from which the black
defendant came . We have been, and are being tried by all-white juries
that have no understanding of the "average reasoning man" of the black
community.
10 . We want land, bread, housing, education, clothing, justice and peace.
And as our major political objective, a United Nations-supervised plebiscite to be held throughout the black colony in which only black colonial
subjects will be allowed to participate, for the purpose of determining the
will of black people as to their national destiny.
When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one
people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with
another, and to assume, among the powers of the earth, the separate and
equal station to which the laws of nature and nature's God entitle them, a
decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare
the causes which impel them to the separation .
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal;
that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights ;
that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness . That, to
secure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their
just powers from the consent of the governed ; that, whenever any form of
government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people
to alter or to abolish it, and to institute a new government, laying its
foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as
to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that governments long established should not
be changed for light and transient causes ; and, accordingly, all experience
hath shown, that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are
sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they
are accustomed . But, when a long train of abuses and unsurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design .to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such government, and to provide new guards .for their future security .

Huey would say, "cc newspaper is
the voice of a party, the voice of
the Panther must be heard
throughout the land."

July 1967--Minister of Defense, IlLey P . Newton (right) and
Chairman, Bobby Seale (left), reading an early edition of B.P .P .
Newspaper at the home of Eldridge Cleaver, Minister of Information B.P .P.

W - found we as citizens of this country were being
kept duped by the government and kept misinformed
by the mass media,
SEIZE THE T[ME 1

TO SUBSCRIBE TO THE BLACK PANTHER, BLACK COMMUNITY NEWS SERVICE SEND NAME, ADDRESS, CITY,
STATE/ZIP , COUNTRY TO :
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION,
BLACK PANTHER PARTY,
BOX 2967, CUSTOM HOUSE,
SAN FRANCISCO, CA. 94126

National
Subscriptions

3 MONTHS: (t3 ISSUES) . . . . . . . . . . . .
6 MONTHS : (2G ISSUES) . . . . . . . . . . . .
ONE YEAR : (52 ISSUES) . . . . . . . . . . .

$2 .SO

$5 . 00
$7.50

Foreign
Subscriptions
Q

CI
$9.00

$12.00

$ls.oo.

I'LI:ASE SEND CHECK OR MONEY ORDER PAYABLE TO : THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY

ON THE IDEOLOGY OF
THE BLACK PANTHER PARTY
BY LldriEge Cleaver
