Mao’s Concept of Guerrilla Warfare
by B. N. Majumdar
Tse-tung is thee foremost Chinese
military strategist. He has not attended any
military school or college, nor has he

Mao

concepts of warfare were formulated during

the various stag3s of his sttuggle against
the Japanese. But these still hold good
the
of
uniform
donned any military
regular today and are apparently being implemented
in the various small wars now being fought
the
doors
been
He
never
has
through
army.
of any military academy, nor is he a graduate around China’s periphery.
Because of the military expediency of
of a Staff College or Defence College. In
the
disthese
anti-Japanese struggle Mao propagated
seemingly professional
spite of
the
ide3 of guerrilla warfare whereby the
and
revered
he
is
respected
qualifications,
whole people would become fully engulfed
as the foremost Chinese military strategist,
in the struggle. It had to be so because the
whose writings are best seilers in the
world today, who is studied throughout the regular army of the Kuomintang was a
world as the authority on irregular warfare degenerate corrupt force.
Mao noted that some ills of the Kuominand who is perhaps even putting Confucius and Sun Tzu, the pioneer of ancient
tang army had to be eradicated before
in
the
shade.
people participated in the war with full
military literature,
enthusiasm. The people could be aroused
Mao had his grooming in the hard school
Since
his
arrival
on
only by their active participation. And
of practical soldiering.
the arena of Chinese politics he has guided
guerrilla war was the best means of ensurthe destinies of millions of Chinese ever
ing this participation. Of course, there were
other reasons warranting the organisation
since he took part in the Long March,
fought the Japanese and the Kuomintang of guerrila warfare. The chief of these was
and finally took over the reins of govern- that the Chinese Army was in no way
ment in 1949.
equipped to take on the Japanese in pitched
battles. But the main reason was the involCommunist China’s rise is being felt in
vement of the people.
all spheres of activity in Southeast Asia.
For waging guerrilla war successfully
Many countries have felt the pressure of her
clandestine activities around their borders it was necessary to enlist the political
but do not scream about it much, perhaps support of the people and this gave an
because of the fear of her military strength.
opportunity to the Communists to preach
to the people their faith and their way of
Mao’s ideas and strategies have been behind
life. This also enabied them to inject
all Chinese expansionist activities in Asia.
It is, therefore, incumbent on all of us to political norms and ideas into what would
study critically the underlying and hidden be purely military organisation.
meaning of Mao’s sayings, ideas and conclusions.

MaoTse-tung’s main military writings are
contained in Volume 2 of his selected works
(though some are found in Volume 4). It
will be interesting to note that Mao’s
Mr. Majumdar is a Lt. Col. in the Indian Army.

Politico-military Policy
In order to meet the Japanese offensive,
the Chinese Communist Party formulated
some
important politico-military policies.
It recommended a general mobilisation of
the Army, Navy and the Air Force of the
whole country. Troops were also to be
deployed for the protection of rear areas.
Among the purely military measures the
choice of leaders was very important. The
military commands were to be entrusted to
&dquo;generals who are loyal to the national
interest&dquo;. This meant various things. It
meant that the generals had to have a party
bias so that the &dquo;political work of the
army&dquo; could be reformed in keeping with
the overall political concept of the Communist Party. It also meant that there was to
be &dquo;unity between officers and men and
unity between the army and the people&dquo;,
that the strategic directives should be
issued &dquo;to assure unity of aim in military
operations&dquo;, that &dquo;guerrilla warfare should
account for a part of the strategic task
in co-ordination with regular warfare&dquo;,
that &dquo;collaborators&dquo; be weeded out, that
suitable steps be taken to mobillse reserves
and train them for the front, and that,
finally, adequate logistical arrangements be
made to &dquo;replenish, on a reasonable basis,
the equipment and supplies of the armed
forces&dquo;.
The concept of modern war is all-embracing. It concerns the military as well as the

people. People’s cooperation is as important
m i I itary action by the fighting forces.

as

Mao

understood that the best means

war without relying on the great masses of
the people&dquo;. So he propounded the cause of
national liberation. Mao combined social
revolution with national liberation and
aroused the
enthusiasm of the entire

population.
It was throughout visualised by Mao that
in order to avoid subversion from within
the armed forces must be based on their
political loyalty to the regime, that political
loyalty was vital for the success of the
communsiation of the country, and that
ideological success would never be posslble
without politica) co-operation of the armed
forces. From the very outset Mao thought it
prudent to keep control over the armed

forces through political guidance. After all
political power emanated from the ·barrel
of a gun’. The source of power and strength
of the regime rested in the Armed forces.
Hence emphasis on political control of the

army.
Mao realised that without the willing
participation of the Armed forces the
national cause would not triumph. There-

fore, in addition

to various political, economic and social reforms he advocated that
soldiers must get rise in pay and that good

of their families should be taken when
they were away fighting on the battlefield.

care

to

people’s cooperation was to improve
their lot. By ’people’ Mao did not mean
merely factory workers and workers of
ensure

defence industries; he meant every individual man, woman and child. Mao propounded that the combined strength of the people
and the army would be able to deal a deadly
blow to the enemy.
Mao correctly estimated that in order to
rouse the people some ground had to be
found as the rallying point of their spirit.
For Mao it was class struggle. So he sought
to bring people actively
into the class
He
further
knew
that &dquo;beyond
struggle.
we
can
win
no
doubt,
victory in a national

Policy and Strategy
To achieve unity of purpose during the
formative stage and the period of struggle,
it was vital that the armed forces were kept
under the control of the political party, at
least till consolidation was complete. It is
quite possible that Mao had it in mind to run
the armed forces of Communist China
through the political machinery of the State

integral part of the Party machinery.
He started by advocating complete integration of the politico-military machine of the
state and whole-hearted participation in the
struggle by the people.
Perhaps the most interesting and
as an
of the military
writings of Mao is that devoted to the
enunciation of the theory and practice of
guerrilla warfare. This treatise has become
the bible of guerrilla war throughout the
world today, and many have based their
work on the main ideas of this book,
though, perhaps with certain modifications
to suit the local conditions and idiosyncracies of the people.
Though guerrilla wars have been fought
in all parts of the world throughout history
very few leaders have recorded experiences
in such a clear and methodical manner as Mao
Tse-tung has. There is no doubt that Mao
was influenced in his ideas by the military,
political, social and economic conditions
which existed at the time in China. This
made Mao realise that in an undeveloped
country like his where distances were vast,
communications
undeveloped and nonexisting, social and economic conditions
feudal, and people slumbering, there was
no other
way but to stage guerrilla war
with the sympathy and support of the

China was a big and weak country being
attacked by a small but strong country. The
struggle would be protracted for obvious
reasons. To succeed against such an attack,
when native conditions were not conducive
to the efficient conduct of war, the answer
was &dquo;primarily not to co-ordinate with the
regular troops in their campaigns on the
interior line, but to fight independently on
exterior line&dquo;.
There were also &dquo;the problems of the
base areas, of the development of guerrilla
warfare into mobile warfare&dquo;. Also one had
to remember that wars would not only be
long drawn but that there would also be
small-scale, well-dispersed, short and intermittent conflicts.
M;ao emphasised one basic principle for
the conduct of guerrilla war and he considered that all others were mere corollaries
to the basic principle. This was &dquo;to strive

people.

Their principal point was that in addition to
their self-preservation, the guerrilla forces
must expand and develop in order to reach
when they could take on the
a stature
regular army of the enemy and fight pitched
battles. The essential points of this whole
strategy were preservation and expansion of
the guerrilla forces, annihilation and ousting
of the enemy, and co-ordination with the
operations of the regular army.
Many other tactical guide-lines were
enunciated within the frame-work of the
main principles. Some of these have been
expounded in sufficient detail. But on the
whole they depend on sound common
sense, ready wit and willingness to act on
the spur of the moment.
Throughout the treatise Mao has repeatedly emphasised the political aspect of the
struggle. In planning and conducting
guerrilla operations, political considerations

thought-provoking

part

Strategic considerations
There is a mistaken belief on the part of
certain proponents of guerrilla warfare that
it can win wars without regular operations

and this has been mainly ascribed to Mao
Tse-tung. This is wrong. Mao has categorically stated that &dquo;guerrilla warfare would
also merely play a co-ordinating role in the

campaigns&dquo;.
Guerrilla warfare will

always play a role
the regular warfare. It will
supplement but will never win the war by
itself. therefore, the conduct of guerrilla
operations must be closely co-ordinated with
the operations of the regular army.
Though the problems of guerrilla warfare are merely tactical, there were some
subsidiary to

strategic considerations which were specially

applicable

in

the

conditions

of China.

as far as possible to preserve one’s own
strength and annihilate that of the enemy&dquo;.
Keeping in view this main principle,
Mao
propagated six other principles.

...
were

over

to be given the pride of place even
purely military considerations.

Strategical Concepts and Tactical Ideas
The main strategical concepts of guerrilla
war emphasised
by Mao are initiative,
flexibility, thorough planning, conduct of
offensive operations in a defensive war,
battles of quick decision in a protracted
war, exterior line operations within interior
line operations, co-ordination of guerrilla
actions with regular warfare, establishment
of base areas, development of guerrrilla
operations into mobile warfare, and, finally,
command relationship
for
harmonious
war
conduct
of
in
all
smooth
spheres.
Within the framework of these main
strategfcal concepts many other minor,
though important, tactical concepts have
been propounded.
Mao introduced some interesting tactical
ideas. Some of his oft-quoted important
maxims are: &dquo;In guerrilla operations concentration of the biggest possible force,
secret and swift action, suprise attacks on
the enemy and quick division in battles
while passive defence proare required,
crastination and dispersion of forces immediately before combat must be carefully
avoided&dquo;; &dquo;The basic principle of guerrilla
warfare must be one of offensive; such
offensives must take the form of surprise
attacks&dquo;; &dquo;rather a big force to strike at
a small enemy segment&dquo;;
&dquo;Simultaneously
expedite and await the change of the
international situation as well as the
enemy’s collapse from within, so as to
launch a strategic counter-offensive&dquo;; &dquo;Any
army that loses its initiative will be forced
into a passive position and deprived of its
freedom of action, and will run the risk of
being exterminated or defeated&dquo;; &dquo;They
(guerrillas) can appear and disappear
mysteriously in the enemy’s rear and completely baffle him&dquo;; &dquo;The initiative is not
the natural gift of a genius, but something

achieved by an intelligent leader who
studies with a receptive mind and makes
correct estimations of objective conditions
and correct military and political dispositions&dquo; ; &dquo;The ability to run away is precisely
one of the characteristics of the guerrillas&dquo;;
&dquo;Flexible employment of forces is more
indispensable in guerrilla warfare than in
regular warfare&dquo;; ~‘In employing the guerrilla units, the director of guerrilla war is
a fisherman
lil<e
casting a net which he
should be able to spread out as well as to
draw in&dquo;; &dquo;Dispersion, concentration and
shifting of the forces are the three ways of
flexibility employing the forces in guerrilla
warfare&dquo;; ’~If the enemy’s forces at a place
are particularly strong, the guerrilla units
should not stay there long&dquo;; &dquo;In general,
the shifting of forces should be done secretly and swiftly. Ingeneous devices such as
making a noise in the east while attacking
in the west, appearing now in the south
and now in the north, hit-and-run and
night action should be constantly employed
to mislead, entice and confuse the enemy&dquo;;
&dquo;The offensive is the only means of annihilating the enemy as well as the principal
means of preserving
oneself, while pure
defence and withdrawal can play only a
temporary and partial role in preserving
oneself and are utterly useless in annihilating the enemy&dquo;; &dquo;We must spread a guerrilla war all over the vast enemy-occupied
area, converting the enemy’s rear into his
front and forcing him to fight ceaselessly
throughout his occupied areas&dquo;; &dquo;The buildup of an armed force is the most fundamental link in establishing a base area; without
an armed force or with one that is not
strong enough, nothing can be done&dquo;; &dquo;The
armed forces shou Id be employed in coordination with the masses of the people to
&dquo;Conservatism
in
defeat the enemy&dquo;;
guerrilla warfare must be opposed&dquo;; ·‘In
our dispositions we should contain a number of enemy columns with our supple-
use our main force to
attack a single enemy column by springing
surprise attacks on it in campaigns and
battles (mainly in the form of ambushes)
and striking it while it is on the move&dquo;;
&dquo;A leader in a guerrilla war should not think
of abandoning his present base area and
shifting to another, unless many attempts
have been made to smash the enemy’s
vigorous converging attacks and it is conclusively shown that they cannot be smashed there&dquo;; &dquo;It is necessary to give the
troops rest and training, and the best time
for this is when the enemy is on the defensive&dquo; ; &dquo;To raise the quality of the guerrilla units we must improve them politically
and organisationally and along the lines of
their equipment, military training, tactics
and discipline, gradually remoulding them
on the pattern of the regular
army and
their
in
work.
Polireducing
guerrilla style
it
is
to
make
both
the
tically
imperative
commanders and the rank and file realise
the necessity of raising the guerrilla units
to the level of the regular army, to encourage all of them to strive towards this end,
and to guarantee its realisation by means of
political work&dquo;; &dquo;The more extensive the
area, the more complex the situation and
the greater the distance
between the
and
the
lower
the more
ranks,
higher-ups
advisable it becomes to allow greater independence and initiative to the lower ranks,

mentary forces, and

to give their actions

more of a

local

nature

and make them more adapted to the
demands of local conditions, so that we
can cultivate in the local ranks
and among
the local personnel the ability for independent work, tackle complicated situations
and develop a victorious guerrilla v~ar&dquo;.
It

will be seen from the foregoing
quotations that there was a complete fusion
between strategical and tactical ideas,
one overlapping the other without much
clear-cut distinction.
Perhaps this was

inevitable, coming as it did from
thinker.
Mao

propounded

new

a

political

ideas

about

strategy and tactics. He had read history
and had learnt from past experience of his
own country.
Therefore, he could draw
profusely tactical ideas for efficient conduct
of guerri Ila warfare. Perhaps he had also
borrowed ideas from the experiences of
Lenin a.nd Stalin.
Mao is repetitive in his ideas, though
perhaps this serves to emphasise certain
aspects of his views. It will also be noted

that, though

guerrilla war was important;

Mao thought of waging regular warfare
to defeat the. enemy on the battlefield.
It
would never have been possible to defeat
the Japanese totally unless regular war was
conducted in addition to guerrilla war. Mao
did not seem to lose sight of this aspect
though he had profusely theorised on guerrilla war in his many writings and treatises.
Operations on the flanks and in the rear
seem to be the watchword of Chinese
tactical concepts. This is clear from the
experiences so far obtained from contacts
with the Chinese in Korea, Indo-China, the
Indian border and also from their own
civil war.
Outflanking movements and
infiltration into the rear, specialised by the
Chinese troops, seem to be unmatched so
far by any other eastern or western armies.
Political Indoctrination

Historically China has often been a
politically corrupt nation. Under feudal
overlor ds the relations between officers,
men and the people were not too
happy.
There was no unity of purpose bscween
officers and men, discipline was almost
non-ex:istent and officers beat and bullied
their men in a most inhuman manner.
Similarly, the relationship between the
army and the people was far from happy.
People. had no confidence in the army beand raped the
cause the officers looted

..
people

who

were

Furthermore,

uttenly helpless
the

and

poor.
army
kept
aloof from the people; they never took
any part in the activities of the state. All
this

was

not conducive to the healthy
of
the people’s cooperation with
growth
the army. Mao set about to correct this
state of affairs and laid down strict rules to
be observed by the guerrillas and the
was

regular army troops.
Mao also gave much thought to the
problem of the prisoners of war. He considered that &dquo;our victory depends not only
upon the exploits of our troops .but also
upon the disintegration of the enemy
troops.&dquo; With a view to achieve this,
Mao propounded the idea of ‘·lenient
treatment to prisoners of war&dquo; so that the
enemy forces would be gradually disintegrated, thus rendering their army im-

potent.
Mao said, &dquo;we shall neither insult them
nor brow-beat
them, but explain to them

The important

collect
he communist armies not by forcing the people
but by encouraging them to join without
compulsion. This gained not only popular
sympathy and active collaboration of the
people but also soldiers to fight for the

thing was

to

recruits and reinforcements for

communist

cause.

Conclusion
Mao fully visualised the real implicatlon
and magnitude of the conflicts. He felt
that guerrilla fighting would be a protracted
war and that the people and the government must be partners in this venture.
There was no question of conflict merely
between two armies; it would be a war
between two nations, two peoples and two
governments. Mao realised that unless the
people fully parricipated in this conflict
there could be no victory.

the harmony between the interests of the
people of the two countries, set them free
and let them go home.&dquo; This was a subtle
psychological method to win their sympathy
to the communist cause and convince them
of the wrongness of the cause they were
fighting for. Similarly, Mao thought of and
practised political indoctrination of the

But before people took active part in
such a war, the right atmosphere must be
created. There must exist the best of
relations between the people, the army,
the government and the party. Unless
these functioned harmoniously and with
complete understanding it would be difficult
to give the conflict a popular character.
Mao has made these the main tasks of the

prisoners of war.

party.

Himalayan States
Continued from page 20
(
)
India in respect of their foreign policy
and defence. It is reported that China did
&dquo;approach the Bhutanese with an offer to
negotiate a border agreement, also to recognize Bhutan’s sovereignty, to extend diplomatic recognition and to provide technical
aid. These efforts have not succeeded.
to
George Patterson :Recent Chinese Policies
and Towards the Himalayan Border
China Quarterly No. 12 OctoberDecember 1962. (p. 199).
in Tibet

States.

has not recognised India’s treaty
in Bhutan and Sikkim.
both
The
rights
Chinese ultimatum to India during the
Indo-Pakistan war about the so-called
installations in Sikkim is wellknown. China
did not carry out the threats probably
because of a possible Indian retaliation.
Another factor which seems to prevent
China from attempting physical absorption
of these areas is its possible repurcussions
It would seem that China
on Nepal.

China

(Continued on page 35)
