Guerrilla Warfare By Ernesto "Che" Guevara
Written in 1961

Table of Contents
Click on a title to move to that section of the book. The book consists of three chapters, with several
numbered subsections in each. A two-part appendex and epilogue conclude the work. Recall that
you can search for text strings in a long document like this. Take advantage of the electronic format
to research intelligently.

CHAPTER I: GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF GUERRILLA WARFARE
1. ESSENCE OF GUERRILLA WARFARE
2. GUERRILLA STRATEGY
3. GUERRILLA TACTICS
4. WARFARE ON FAVORABLE GROUND
5. WARFARE ON UNFAVORABLE GROUND
6. SUBURBAN WARFARE

CHAPTER II: THE GUERRILLA BAND
1. THE GUERRILLA FIGHTER: SOCIAL REFORMER
2. THE GUERRILLA FIGHTER AS COMBATANT
3. ORGANIZATION OF A GUERRILLA BAND
4. THE COMBAT
5. BEGINNING, DEVELOPMENT, AND END OF A GUERRILLA WAR

CHAPTER III: ORGANIZATION OF THE GUERRILLA FRONT
1. SUPPLY
2. CIVIL ORGANIZATION
3. THE ROLE OF THE WOMAN
4. MEDICAL PROBLEMS
5. SABOTAGE
6. WAR INDUSTRY
7. PROPAGANDA

8. INTELLIGENCE
9. TRAINING AND INDOCTRINATION
10.THE ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE ARMY OF A REVOLUTIONARY
MOVEMENT

APPENDICES
1. ORGANIZATION IN SECRET OF THE FIRST GUERRILLA BAND
2. DEFENSE OF POWER THAT HAS BEEN WON
3. Epilogue
4. End of the book

CHAPTER I: GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF GUERRILLA
WARFARE
1. ESSENCE OF GUERRILLA WARFARE
The armed victory of the Cuban people over the Batista dictatorship was not only the triumph of
heroism as reported by the newspapers of the world; it also forced a change in the old dogmas
concerning the conduct of the popular masses of Latin America. It showed plainly the capacity of
the people to free themselves by means of guerrilla warfare from a government that oppresses them.
We consider that the Cuban Revolution contributed three fundamental lessons to the conduct of
revolutionary movements in America. They are:
(1) Popular forces can win a war against the army.
(2) It is not necessary to wait until all conditions for making revolution exist; the insurrection can
create them.
(3) In underdeveloped America the countryside is the basic area for armed fighting.
Of these three propositions the first two contradict the defeatist attitude of revolutionaries or
pseudo- revolutionaries who remain inactive and take refuge in the pretext that against a
professional army nothing can be done, who sit down to wait until in some mechanical way all
necessary objective and subjective conditions are given without working to accelerate them. As
these problems were formerly a subject of discussion in Cuba, until facts settled the question, they
are probably still much discussed in America. Naturally, it is not to be thought that all conditions
for revolution are going to be created through the impulse given to them by guerrilla activity. It
must always be kept in mind that there is a necessary minimum without which the establishment
and consolidation of the first center is not practicable. People must see clearly the futility of
maintaining the fight for social goals within the framework of civil debate. When the forces of
oppression come to maintain themselves in power against established law; peace is considered
already broken.

In these conditions popular discontent expresses itself in more active forms. An attitude of
resistance finally crystallizes in an outbreak of fighting, provoked initially by the conduct of the
authorities. Where a government has come into power through some form of popular vote,
fraudulent or not, and maintains at least an appearance of constitutional legality, the guerrilla
outbreak cannot be promoted, since the possibilities of peaceful struggle have not yet been
exhausted.
The third proposition is a fundamental of strategy. It ought to be noted by those who maintain
dogmatically that the struggle of the masses is centered in city movements, entirely forgetting the
immense participation of the country people in the life of all the underdeveloped parts of America.
Of course the struggles of the city masses of organized workers should not be underrated; but their
real possibilities of engaging in armed struggle must be carefully analyzed where the guarantees
which customarily adorn our constitutions are suspended or ignored. In these conditions the illegal
workers' movements face enormous dangers. They must function secretly without arms. The
situation in the open country is not so difficult. There, in places beyond the reach of the repressive
forces, the armed guerrillas can support the inhabitants. We will later make a careful analysis of
these three conclusions that stand out in the Cuban revolutionary experience. We emphasize them
now at the beginning of this work as our fundamental contribution.
Guerrilla warfare, the basis of the struggle of a people to redeem itself, has diverse characteristics,
different facets, even though the essential will for liberation remains the same. It is obvious -and
writers on the theme have said it many times-that war responds to a certain series of scientific laws;
whoever ignores them will go down to defeat. Guerrilla warfare as a phase of war must be ruled by
all of these; but besides, because of its special aspects, a series of corollary laws must also be
recognized in order to carry it forward. Though geographical and social conditions in each country
determine the mode and particular forms that guerrilla warfare will take, there are general laws that
hold for all fighting of this type.
Our task at the moment is to find the basic principles of this kind of fighting and the rules to be
followed by peoples seeking liberation; to develop theory from facts; to generalize and give
structure to our experience for the profit of others.
Let us first consider the question: who are the combatants in guerrilla warfare? On one side we have
a group composed of the oppressor and his agents, the professional army, well armed and
disciplined, in many cases receiving foreign help as well as the help of the bureaucracy in the
employ of the oppressor. On the other side are the people of the nation or region involved. It is
important to emphasize that guerrilla warfare is a war of the masses, a war of the people. The
guerrilla band is an armed nucleus, the fighting vanguard of the people. It draws its great force from
the mass of the people themselves. The guerrilla band is not to be considered inferior to the army
against which it fights simply because it is inferior in firepower. Guerrilla warfare is used by the
side which is supported by a majority but which possesses a much smaller number of arms for use
in defense against oppression.
The guerrilla fighter needs full help from the people of the area. This is an indispensable condition.
This is clearly seen by considering the case of bandit gangs that operate in a region. They have all
the characteristics of a guerrilla army, homogeneity, respect for the leader, valor, knowledge of the
ground, and, often, even good understanding of the tactics to be employed. The only thing missing
is support of the people; and, inevitably, these gangs are captured and exterminated by the public
force.
Analyzing the mode of operation of the guerrilla band, seeing its form of struggle and

understanding its base in the masses, we can answer the question: why does the guerrilla fighter
fight? We must come to the inevitable conclusion that the guerrilla fighter is a social reformer, that
he takes up arms responding to the angry protest of the people against their oppressors, and that he
fights in order to change the social system that keeps all his unarmed brothers in ignominy and
misery. He launches himself against the conditions of the reigning institutions at a particular
moment and dedicates himself with all the vigor that circumstances permit to breaking the mold of
these institutions.
When we analyze more fully the tactic of guerrilla warfare, we will see that the guerrilla fighter
needs to have a good knowledge of the surrounding countryside, the paths of entry and escape, the
possibilities of speedy maneuver, good hiding places; naturally also, he must count on the support
of the people. All this indicates that the guerrilla fighter will carry out his action in wild places of
small population. Since in these places the struggle of the people for reforms is aimed primarily and
almost exclusively at changing the social form of land ownership, the guerrilla fighter is above all
an agrarian revolutionary. He interprets the desires of the great peasant mass to be owners of land,
owners of their means of production, of their animals, of all that which they have long yearned to
call their own, of that which constitutes their life and will also serve as their cemetery.
It should be noted that in current interpretations there are two different types of guerrilla warfare,
one of which-a struggle complementing great regular armies such as was the case of the Ukrainian
fighters in the Soviet Union-does not enter into this analysis. We are interested in the other type, the
case of an armed group engaged in struggle against the constituted power, whether colonial or not,
which establishes itself as the only base and which builds itself up in rural areas. In all such cases,
whatever the ideological aims that may inspire the fight, the economic aim is determined by the
aspiration toward ownership of land.
The China of Mao begins as an outbreak of worker groups in the South, which is defeated and
almost annihilated. It succeeds in establishing itself and begins its advance only when, after the long
march from Yenan, it takes up its base in rural territories and makes agrarian reform its fundamental
goal. The struggle of Ho Chi Minh is based in the rice-growing peasants, who are oppressed by the
French colonial yoke; with this force it is going forward to the defeat of the colonialists. In both
cases there is a framework of patriotic war against the Japanese invader, but the economic basis of a
fight for the land has not disappeared. In the case of Algeria, the grand idea of Arab nationalism has
its economic counterpart in the fact that a million French settlers utilize nearly all of the arable land
of Algeria. In some countries, such as Puerto Rico, where the special conditions of the island have
not permitted a guerrilla outbreak, the nationalist spirit, deeply wounded by the discrimination that
is daily practiced, has as its basis the aspiration of the peasants (even though many of them are
already a proletariat) to recover the land that the Yankee invader seized from them. This same
central idea, though in different forms, inspired the small farmers, peasants, and slaves of the
eastern estates of Cuba to close ranks and defend together the right to possess land during the thirtyyear war of liberation.
Taking account of the possibilities of development of guerrilla warfare, which is transformed with
the increase in the operating potential of the guerrilla band into a war of positions, this type of
warfare, despite its special character, is to be considered as an embryo, a prelude, of the other. The
possibilities of growth of the guerrilla band and of changes in the mode of fight until conventional
warfare is reached, are as great as the possibilities of defeating the enemy in each of the different
battles, combats, or skirmishes that take place. Therefore, the fundamental principle is that no
battle, combat, or skirmish is to be fought unless it will be won. There is a malevolent definition
that says: _The guerrilla fighter is the Jesuit of warfare._ By this is indicated a quality of
secretiveness, of treachery, of surprise that is obviously an essential element of guerrilla warfare. It
is a special kind of Jesuitism, naturally prompted by circumstances, which necessitates acting at

certain moments in ways different from the romantic and sporting conceptions with which we are
taught to believe war is fought.
War is always a struggle in which each contender tries to annihilate the other. Besides using force,
they will have recourse to all possible tricks and stratagems in order to achieve the goal.
Military strategy and tactics are a representation by analysis of the objectives of the
groups and of the means of achieving these objectives. These means contemplate taking
advantage of all the weak points of the enemy. The fighting action of each individual platoon in a
large army in a war of positions will present the same characteristics as those of the guerrilla band.
It uses secretiveness, treachery, and surprise; and when these are not present, it is because vigilance
on the other side prevents surprise. But since the guerrilla band is a division unto itself, and since
there are large zones of territory not controlled by the enemy, it is always possible to carry out
guerrilla attacks in such a way as to assure surprise; and it is the duty of the guerrilla fighter to do
so. _Hit and run_ some call this scornfully, and this is accurate. Hit and run, wait, lie in ambush,
again hit and run, and thus repeatedly, without giving any rest to the enemy. There is in all this, it
would appear, a negative quality, an attitude of retreat, of avoiding frontal fights. However, this is
consequent upon the general strategy of guerrilla warfare, which is the same in its ultimate end as is
any warfare: to win, to annihilate the enemy.
Thus it is clear that guerrilla warfare is a phase that does not afford in itself opportunities to arrive
at complete victory. It is one of the initial phases of warfare and will develop continuously until the
guerrilla army in its steady growth acquires the characteristics of a regular army. At that moment it
will be ready to deal final blows to the enemy and to achieve victory. Triumph will always be the
product of a regular army, even though its origins are in a guerrilla army.
Just as the general of a division in a modern war does not have to die in front of his soldiers, the
guerrilla fighter, who is general of himself, need not die in every battle. He is ready to give his life,
but the positive quality of this guerrilla warfare is precisely that each one of the guerrilla fighters is
ready to die, not to defend an ideal, but rather to convert it into reality. This is the basis, the essence
of guerrilla fighting. Miraculously, a small band of men, the armed vanguard of the great popular
force that supports them, goes beyond the immediate tactical objective, goes on decisively to
achieve an ideal, to establish a new society, to break the old molds of the outdated, and to achieve,
finally, the social justice for which they fight.
Considered thus, all these disparaged qualities acquire a true nobility, the nobility of the end at
which they aim; and it becomes clear that we are not speaking of distorted means of reaching an
end. This fighting attitude, this attitude of not being dismayed at any time, this inflexibility when
confronting the great problems in the final objective is also the nobility of the guerrilla fighter.
2. GUERRILLA STRATEGY

In guerrilla terminology, strategy is understood as the analysis of the objectives to be achieved in
the light of the total military situation and the overall ways of reaching these objectives.
To have a correct strategic appreciation from the point of view of the guerrilla band, it is necessary
to analyze fundamentally what will be the enemy's mode of action. If the final objective is always
the complete destruction of the opposite force, the enemy is confronted in the case of a civil war of
this kind with the standard task: he will have to achieve the total destruction of each one of the
components of the guerrilla band. The guerrilla fighter, on the other hand, must analyze the
resources which the enemy has for trying to achieve that outcome: the means in men, in mobility, in

popular support, in armaments, in capacity of leadership on which he can count. We must make our
own strategy adequate on the basis of these studies, keeping in mind always the final objective of
defeating the enemy army.
There are fundamental aspects to be studied: the armament, for example, and the manner of using
this armament. The value of a tank, of an airplane in a fight of this type must be weighed. The arms
of the enemy, his ammunition, his habits must be considered; because the principal source of
provision for the guerrilla force is precisely in enemy armaments. If there is a possibility of choice,
we should prefer the same type as that used by the enemy, since the greatest problem of the
guerrilla band is the lack of ammunition, which the opponent must provide.
After the objectives have been fixed and analyzed, it is necessary to study the order of the steps
leading to the achievement of the final objective. This should be planned in advance, even though it
will be modified and adjusted as the fighting develops and unforeseen circumstances arise.
At the outset, the essential task of the guerrilla fighter is to keep himself from being destroyed.
Little by little it will be easier for the members of the guerrilla band or bands to adapt themselves to
their form of life and to make flight and escape from the forces that are on the offensive an easy
task, because it is performed daily. When this condition is reached, the guerrilla, having taken up
inaccessible positions out of reach of the enemy, or having assembled forces that deter the enemy
from attacking, ought to proceed to the gradual weakening of the enemy. This will be carried out at
first at those points nearest to the points of active warfare against the guerrilla band and later will be
taken deeper into enemy territory, attacking his communications, later attacking or harassing his
bases of operations and his central bases, tormenting him on all sides to the full extent of the
capabilities of the guerrilla forces.
The blows should be continuous. The enemy soldier in a zone of operations ought not to be allowed
to sleep; his outposts ought to be attacked and liquidated systematically. At every moment the
impression ought to be created that he is surrounded by a complete circle. In wooded and broken
areas this effort should be maintained both day and night; in open zones that are easily penetrated
by enemy patrols, at night only. In order to do all this the absolute cooperation of the people and a
perfect knowledge of the ground is necessary. These two necessities affect every minute of the life
of the guerrilla fighter. Therefore, along with centers for study of present and future zones of
operations, intensive popular work must be undertaken to explain the motives of the revolution, its
ends, and to spread the incontrovertible truth that victory of the enemy against the people is finally
impossible. Whoever does not feel this undoubted truth cannot be a guerrilla fighter.
This popular work should at first be aimed at securing secrecy; that is, each peasant, each member
of the society in which action is taking place, will be asked not to mention what he sees and hears;
later, help will be sought from inhabitants whose loyalty to the revolution offers greater guarantees;
still later, use will be made of these persons in missions of contact, for transporting goods or arms,
as guides in the zones familiar to them; still later, it is possible to arrive at organized mass action in
the centers of work, of which the final result will be the general strike.
The strike is a most important factor in civil war, but in order to reach it a series of complementary
conditions are necessary which do not always exist and which very rarely come to exist
spontaneously. It is necessary to create these essential conditions, basically by explaining the
purposes of the revolution and by demonstrating the forces of the people and their possibilities.
•

It is also possible to have recourse to certain very homogeneous groups, which must have
shown their efficacy previously in less dangerous tasks, in order to make use of another of
the terrible arms of the guerrilla band, sabotage. It is possible to paralyze entire armies, to
suspend the industrial life of a zone, leaving the inhabitants of a city without factories,

without light, without water, without communications of any kind, without being able to risk
travel by highway except at certain hours. If all this is achieved, the morale of the enemy
falls, the morale of his combatant units weakens, and the fruit ripens for plucking at a
precise moment.
All this presupposes an increase in the territory included within the guerrilla action, but an
excessive in- crease of this territory is to be avoided. It is essential always to preserve a
strong base of operations and to continue strengthening it during the course of the war.
Within this territory, measures of indoctrination of the inhabitants of the zone should be
utilized; measures of quarantine should be taken against the irreconcilable enemies of the
revolution; all the purely defensive measures, such as trenches, mines, and communications,
should be perfected.
When the guerrilla band has reached a respectable power in arms and in number of
combatants, it ought to proceed to the formation of new columns. This is an act similar to
that of the beehive when at a given moment it releases a new queen, who goes to another
region with a part of the swarm. The mother hive with the most notable guerrilla chief will
stay in the less dangerous places, while the new columns will penetrate other enemy
territories following the cycle already described.
A moment will arrive in which the territory occupied by the columns is too small for them;
and in the advance toward regions solidly defended by the enemy, it will be necessary to
confront powerful forces. At that instant the columns join, they offer a compact, fighting
front, and a war of positions is reached, a war carried on by regular armies. However, the
former guerrilla army cannot cut itself off from its base, and it should create new guerrilla
bands behind the enemy acting in the same way as the original bands operated earlier,
proceeding thus to penetrate enemy territory until it is dominated.
It is thus that guerrillas reach the stage of attack, of the encirclement of fortified bases, of
the defeat of reinforcements, of mass action, ever more ardent, in the whole national
territory, arriving finally at the objective of the war: victory.
3. GUERRILLA TACTICS

[Che smoking his pipe in the mountains of Bolivia] In military language, tactics are the practical
methods of achieving the grand strategic objectives.
In one sense they complement strategy and in an-other they are more specific rules within it. As
means, tactics are much more variable, much more flexible than the final objectives, and they
should be adjusted continually during the struggle. There are tactical objectives that remain constant
throughout a war and others that vary. The first thing to be considered is the adjusting of guerrilla
action to the action of the enemy.
The fundamental characteristic of a guerrilla band is mobility. This permits it in a few minutes to
move far from a specific theater and in a few hours far even from the region, if that becomes
necessary; permits it constantly to change front and avoid any type of encirclement. As the
circumstances of the war require, the guerrilla band can dedicate itself exclusively to fleeing from
an encirclement which is the enemy's only way of forcing the band into a decisive fight that could
be unfavorable; it can also change the battle into a counter-encirclement (small bands of men are
presumably surrounded by the enemy when suddenly the enemy is surrounded by stronger

contingents; or men located in a safe place serve as a lure, leading to the encirclement and
annihilation of the entire troops and supply of an attacking force). Characteristic of this war of
mobility is the so-called minuet, named from the analogy with the dance: the guerrilla bands
encircle an enemy position, an advancing column, for example; they encircle it completely from the
four points of the compass, with five or six men in each place, far enough away to avoid being
encircled themselves; the fight is started at any one of the points, and the army moves toward it; the
guerrilla band then retreats, always maintaining visual contact, and initiates its attack from another
point. The army will repeat its action and the guerrilla band the same. Thus, successively, it is
possible to keep an enemy column immobilized, forcing it to expend large quantities of ammunition
and weakening the morale of its troops without incurring great dangers.
This same tactic can be applied at nighttime, closing in more and showing greater aggressiveness,
because in these conditions counter-encirclement is much more difficult. Movement by night is
another important characteristic of the guerrilla band, enabling it to advance into position for an
attack and, where the danger of betrayal exists, to mobilize in new territory. The numerical
inferiority of the guerrilla makes it necessary that attacks always be carried out by surprise; this
great advantage is what permits the guerrilla fighter to inflict losses on the enemy without suffering
losses. In a fight between a hundred men on one side and ten on the other, losses are not equal
where there is one casualty on each side. The enemy loss is always reparable; it amounts to only
one percent of his effectiveness. The loss of the guerrilla band requires more time to be repaired
because it involves a soldier of high specialization and is ten percent of the operating forces.
A dead soldier of the guerrillas ought never to be left with his arms and his ammunition. The duty
of every guerrilla soldier whenever a companion falls is to recover immediately these extremely
precious elements of the fight. In fact, the care which must be taken of ammunition and the method
of using it are further characteristics of guerrilla warfare. In any combat between a regular force and
a guerrilla band it is always possible to know one from the other by their different manner of fire: a
great amount of firing on the part of the regular army, sporadic and accurate shots on the part of the
guerrillas.
Once one of our heroes, now dead, had to employ his machine guns for nearly five minutes, burst
after burst, in order to slow up the advance of enemy soldiers. This fact caused considerable
confusion in our forces, because they assumed from the rhythm of fire that key position must have
been taken by the enemy, since this was one of the rare occasions where departure from the rule of
saving fire had been called for because of the importance of the point being defended.
Another fundamental characteristic of the guerrilla soldier is his flexibility, his ability to adapt
himself to all circumstances, and to convert to his service all of the accidents of the action. Against
the rigidity of classical methods of fighting, the guerrilla fighter invents his own tactics at every
minute of the fight and constantly surprises the enemy.
In the first place, there are only elastic positions, specific places that the enemy cannot pass, and
places of diverting him. Frequently the enemy, after easily overcoming difficulties in a gradual
advance, is surprised to find himself suddenly and solidly detained without possibilities of moving
forward. This is due to the fact that the guerrilla-defended positions, when they have been selected
on the basis of a careful study of the ground, are invulnerable. It is not the number of attacking
soldiers that counts, but the number of defending soldiers. Once that number has been placed there,
it can nearly always hold off a battalion with success. It is a major task of the chiefs to choose well
the moment and the place for defending a position without retreat.
The form of attack of a guerrilla army is also different; starting with surprise and fury, irresistible, it
suddenly converts itself into total passivity.

The surviving enemy, resting, believes that the attacker has departed; he begins to relax, to return to
the routine life of the camp or of the fortress, when suddenly a new attack bursts forth in another
place, with the same characteristics, while the main body of the guerrilla band lies in wait to
intercept reinforcements. At other times an outpost defending the camp will be suddenly attacked
by the guerrilla, dominated, and captured. The fundamental thing is surprise and rapidity of attack.
Acts of sabotage are very important. It is necessary to distinguish clearly between sabotage, a
revolutionary and highly effective method of warfare, and terrorism, a measure that is generally
ineffective and in-discriminate in its results, since it often makes victims of innocent people and
destroys a large number of lives that would be valuable to the revolution. Terrorism should be
considered a valuable tactic when it is used to put to death some noted leader of the oppressing
forces well known for his cruelty, his efficiency in repression, or other quality that makes his
elimination useful. But the killing of persons of small importance is never advisable, since it brings
on an increase of reprisals, including deaths.
There is one point very much in controversy in Opinions about terrorism. Many consider that its
use, by provoking police oppression, hinders all more or less legal or semiclandestine contact with
the masses and makes impossible unification for actions that will be necessary at a critical moment.
This is correct; but it also happens that in a civil war the repression by the governmental power in
certain towns is already so great that, in fact, every type of legal action is suppressed already, and
any action of the masses that is not supported by arms is impossible. It is therefore necessary to be
circumspect in adopting methods of this type and to consider the consequences that they may bring
for the revolution. At any rate, well-managed sabotage is always a very effective arm, though it
should not be employed to put means of production out of action, leaving a sector of the population
paralyzed (and thus without work) unless this paralysis affects the normal life of the society. It is
ridiculous to carry out sabotage against a soft-drink factory, but it is absolutely correct and
advisable to carry out sabotage against a power plant. In the first case, a certain number of workers
are put out of a job but nothing is done to modify the rhythm of industrial life; in the second case,
there will again be displaced workers, but this is entirely justified by the paralysis of the life of the
region. We will return to the technique of sabotage later.
One of the favorite arms of the enemy army, supposed to be decisive in modern times, is aviation.
Nevertheless, this has no use whatsoever during the period that guerrilla warfare is in its first stages,
with small concentrations of men in rugged places. The utility of aviation lies in the systematic
destruction of visible and organized defenses; and for this there must be large concentrations of men
who construct these defenses, something that does not exist in this type of warfare. Planes are also
potent against marches by columns through level places or places without cover; however, this
latter danger is easily avoided by carrying out the marches at night.
One of the weakest points of the enemy is transportation by road and railroad. It is virtually
impossible to maintain a vigil yard by yard over a transport line, a road, or a railroad. At any point a
considerable amount of explosive charge can be planted that will make the road impassable; or by
exploding it at the moment that a vehicle passes, a consider-able loss in lives and materiel to the
enemy is caused at the same time that the road is cut.
The sources of explosives are varied. They can be brought from other zones; or use can be made of
bombs seized from the dictatorship, though these do not always work; or they can be manufactured
in secret laboratories within the guerrilla zone. The technique of setting them off is quite varied;
their manufacture also depends upon the conditions of the guerrilla band.
In our laboratory we made powder which we used as a cap, and we invented various devices for

exploding the mines at the desired moment. The ones that gave the best results were electric. The
first mine that we exploded was a bomb dropped from an aircraft of the dictatorship. We adapted it
by inserting various caps and adding a gun with the trigger pulled by a cord. At the moment that an
enemy truck passed, the weapon was fired to set off the explosion.
These techniques can be developed to a high degree. We have information that in Algeria, for
example, tele-explosive mines, that is, mines exploded by radio at great distances from the point
where they are located, are being used today against the French colonial power.
The technique of lying in ambush along roads in order to explode mines and annihilate survivors is
one of the most remunerative in point of ammunition and arms. The surprised enemy does not use
his ammunition and has no time to flee; so with a small expenditure of ammunition large results are
achieved. As blows are dealt the enemy, he also changes his tactics, and in place of isolated trucks,
veritable motorized columns move. However, by choosing the ground well, the same result can be
produced by breaking the column and concentrating forces on one vehicle. In these cases the
essential elements of guerrilla tactics must always be kept in mind. These are: perfect knowledge of
the ground; surveillance and foresight as to the lines of escape; vigilance over all the secondary
roads that can bring support to the point of attack; intimacy with people in the zone so as to have
sure help from them in respect to supplies, transport, and temporary or permanent hiding places if it
becomes necessary to leave wounded companions behind; numerical superiority at a chosen point
of action; total mobility; and the possibility of counting on reserves.
If all these tactical requisites are fulfilled, surprise attack along the lines of communication of the
enemy yields notable dividends.
A fundamental part of guerrilla tactics is the treatment accorded the people of the zone. Even the
treatment accorded the enemy is important; the norm to be followed should be an absolute
inflexibility at the time of attack, an absolute inflexibility toward all the despicable elements that
resort to informing and assassination, and clemency as absolute as possible to-ward the enemy
soldiers who go into the fight performing or believing that they perform a military duty. It is a good
policy, so long as there are no considerable bases of operations and invulnerable places, to take no
prisoners. Survivors ought to be set free. The wounded should be cared for with all possible
resources at the time of the action. Conduct toward the civil population ought to be regulated by a
large respect for all the rules and traditions of the people of the zone, in order to demonstrate
effectively, with deeds, the moral superiority of the guerrilla fighter over the oppressing soldier.
Except in special situations, there ought to be no execution of justice without giving the criminal an
opportunity to clear himself.
4. WARFARE ON FAVORABLE GROUND

[Che Guevara addressing the United Nations in New York City] As we have already said, guerrilla
fighting will not always take place in country most favorable to the employment of its tactics; but
when it does, that is, when the guerrilla band is located in zones difficult to reach, either because of
dense forests, steep mountains, impassable deserts or marshes, the general tactics, based on the
fundamental postulates of guerrilla warfare, must always be the same. An important point to
consider is the moment for making contact with the enemy. If the zone is so thick, so difficult that
an organized army can never reach it, the guerrilla band should advance to the regions where the
army can arrive and where there will be a possibility of combat.
As soon as the survival of the guerrilla band has been assured, it should fight; it must constantly go

out from its refuge to fight. Its mobility does not have to be as great as in those cases where the
ground is unfavorable; it must adjust itself to the capabilities of the enemy, but it is not necessary to
be able to move as quickly as in places where the enemy can concentrate a large number of men in a
few minutes. Neither is the nocturnal character of this warfare so important; it will be possible in
many cases to carry out daytime operations, especially mobilizations by day, though subjected to
enemy observation by land and air. It is also possible to persist in a military action for a much
longer time, above all in the mountains; it is possible to undertake battles of long duration with very
few men, and it is very probable that the arrival of enemy reinforcements at the scene of the fight
can be prevented.
A close watch over the points of access is, however, an axiom never to be forgotten by the guerrilla
fighter. His aggressiveness (on account of the difficulties that the enemy faces in bringing up
reinforcements) can he greater, he can approach the enemy more closely, fight much more directly,
more frontally and for a longer time, though these rules may be qualified by various circumstances,
such, for example, as the amount of ammunition.
Fighting on favorable ground and particularly in the mountains presents many advantages but also
the inconvenience that it is difficult to capture in a single operation a considerable quantity of arms
and ammunition, owing to the precautions that the enemy takes in these regions. (The guerrilla
soldier must never forget the fact that it is the enemy that must serve as his source of supply of
ammunition and arms.) But much more rapidly than in unfavorable ground the guerrilla band will
here be able to "dig in," that is, to form a base capable of engaging in a war of positions, where
small industries may be in-stalled as they are needed, as well as hospitals, centers for education and
training, storage facilities, organs of propaganda, etc., adequately protected from aviation or from
long-range artillery.
The guerrilla band in these conditions can number many more personnel; there will be
noncombatants and perhaps even a system of training in the use of the arms that eventually are to
fall into the power of the guerrilla army.
The number of men that a guerrilla band can have is a matter of extremely flexible calculation
adapted to the territory, to the means available of acquiring supplies, to the mass flights of
oppressed people from other zones, to the arms available, to the necessities of organization. But, in
any case, it is much more practicable to establish a base and expand with the support of new
combatant elements. The radius of action of a guerrilla band of this type can be as wide as
conditions or the operations of other bands in adjacent territory permit. The range will be limited by
the time that it takes to arrive at a zone of security from the zone of operation; assuming that
marches must be made at night, it will not be possible to operate more than five or six hours away
from a point of maximum security. Small guerrilla bands that work constantly at weakening a
territory can go farther away from the zone of security.
The arms preferable for this type of warfare are long-range weapons requiring small expenditure of
bullets, supported by a group of automatic or semi-automatic arms. Of the rifles and machine guns
that exist in the markets of the United States, one of the best is the M-1 rifle, called the Garand.
However, only people with some experience should use this, since it has the disadvantage of
expending too much ammunition. Medium-heavy arms, such as tripod machine guns, can be used
on favorable ground, affording a greater margin of security for the weapon and its personnel, but
they ought always to be a means of repelling an enemy and not for attack.
An ideal composition for a guerrilla band of 25 men would be: 10 to 15 single-shot rifles and about
10 automatic arms between Garands and hand machine guns, including light and easily portable
automatic arms, such as the Browning or the more modern Belgian FAL and M-14 automatic rifles.

Among the hand machine-guns the best are those of nine millimeters, which permit a larger
transport of ammunition. The simpler its construction the better, because this increases the case of
switching parts. All this must be adjusted to the armament that the enemy uses, Since the
ammunition that he employs is what we are going to use when his arms fall into our hands. It is
practically impossible for heavy arms to be used. Aircraft cannot see anything and cease to operate;
tanks and cannons cannot do much owing to the difficulties of advancing in these zones.
A very important consideration is supply. In general, the zones of difficult access for this very
reason present special problems, since there are few peasants, and therefore animal and food
supplies are scarce. It is necessary to maintain stable lines of communication in order to be able
always to count on a minimum of food, stockpiled, in the event of any disagreeable development. In
this kind of zone of operations the possibilities of sabotage on a large scale are generally not
present; with the inaccessibility goes a lack of constructions, telephone lines, aqueducts, etc., that
could be damaged by direct action.
For supply purposes it is important to have animals, among which the mule is the best in rough
country. Adequate pasturage permitting good nutrition is essential. The mule can pass through
extremely hilly country impossible for other animals. In the most difficult situations it is necessary
to resort to transport by men. Each individual can carry twenty-five kilograms for many hours daily
and for many days.
The lines of communication with the exterior should include a series of intermediate points manned
by people of complete reliability, where products can be stored and where contacts can go to hide
themselves at critical times. Internal lines of communication can also be created. Their extension
will be determined by the stage of development reached by the guerrilla band. In some zones of
operations in the recent Cuban war, telephone lines of many kilometers of length were established,
roads were built, and a messenger service maintained sufficient to cover all zones in a minimum of
time.
There are also other possible means of communication, not used in the Cuban war but perfectly
applicable, such as smoke signals, signals with sunshine reflected by mirrors, and carrier pigeons.
The vital necessities of the guerrillas are to maintain their arms in good condition, to capture
ammunition, and, above everything else, to have adequate shoes. The first manufacturing efforts
should therefore be directed toward these objectives. Shoe factories can initially be cobbler
installations that replace halfsoles on old shoes, expanding afterwards into a series of organized
factories with a good average daily production of shoes. The manufacture of powder is fairly
simple; and much can be accomplished by having a small laboratory and bringing in the necessary
materials from outside. Mined areas constitute a grave danger for the enemy; large areas can be
mined for simultaneous explosion, destroying up to hundreds of men.
5. WARFARE ON UNFAVORABLE GROUND

In order to carry on warfare in country that is not very hilly, lacks forests, and has many roads, all
the fundamental requisites of guerrilla warfare must be observed; only the forms will be altered.
The quantity, not the quality, of guerrilla warfare will change. For example, following the same
order as before, the mobility of this type of guerrilla should be extraordinary; strikes should be
made preferably at night; they should be extremely rapid but the guerrilla should move to places
different from the starting point, the farthest possible from the scene of action, assuming that there
is no place secure from the repressive forces that the guerrilla can use as its garrison.

A man can walk between 30 and 50 kilometers during the night hours; it is possible also to march
during the first hours of daylight, unless the zones of operation are closely watched or there is
danger that people in the vicinity, seeing the passing troops, will notify the pursuing army of the
location of the guerrilla band and its route. It is always preferable in these cases to operate at night
with the greatest possible silence both before and after the action; the first hours of night are best.
Here too there are exceptions to the general rule, since at times the dawn hours will be preferable. It
is never wise to habituate the enemy to a certain form of warfare; it is necessary to vary constantly
the places, the hours, and the forms of operation.
We have already said that the action cannot endure for long, but must be rapid; it must be of a high
degree of effectiveness, last a few minutes, and be followed by an immediate withdrawal. The arms
employed here will not be the same as in the case of actions on favorable ground; a large quantity of
automatic weapons is to be preferred. In night attacks marksmanship is not the determining factor,
but rather concentration of fire; the more automatic arms firing at short distance, the more
possibilities there are of annihilating the enemy.
Also, the use of mines in roads and the destruction of bridges are tactics of great importance.
Attacks by the guerrilla will be less aggressive so far as the persistence and continuation are
concerned, but they can be very violent, and they can utilize different arms, such as mines and the
shotgun. Against open vehicles heavily loaded with men, which is the usual method of transporting
troops, and even against closed vehicles that do not have special defenses- against buses, for
example-the shotgun is a tremendous weapon. A shotgun loaded with large shot is the most
effective. This is not a secret of guerrilla fighters; it is used also in big wars. The Americans used
shotgun platoons armed with high-quality weapons and bayonets for assaulting machine-gun nests.
There is an important problem to explain, that of ammunition; this will almost always be taken from
the enemy. It is therefore necessary to strike blows where there will be the absolute assurance of
restoring the ammunition expended, unless there are large reserves in secure places. In other words,
an annihilating attack against a group of men is not to be under-taken at the risk of expending all
ammunition without being able to replace it. Always in guerrilla tactics it is necessary to keep in
mind the grave problem of procuring the war materiel necessary for continuing the fight. For this
reason guerrilla arms ought to be the same as those used by the enemy, except for weapons such as
revolvers and shotguns, for which the ammunition can be obtained in the zone itself or in the cities.
The number of men that a guerrilla band of this type should include does not exceed ten to fifteen.
In forming a single combat unit it is of great importance always to consider the limitations on
numbers: ten, twelve, fifteen men can hide anywhere and at the same time can help each other in
putting up a powerful resistance to the enemy. Four or five would perhaps be too small a number,
but when the number exceeds ten the possibility that the enemy will discover them in their camp or
on the march is much greater.
Remember that the velocity of the guerrilla band on the march is equal to the velocity of its slowest
man. It is more difficult to find uniformity of marching speed with twenty, thirty, or forty men than
with ten. And the guerrilla fighter on the plain must be fundamentally a runner. Here the practice of
hitting and running acquires its maximum use. The guerrilla bands on the plain suffer the enormous
inconvenience of being subject to a rapid encirclement and of not having sure places where they can
set up a firm resistance; therefore they must live in conditions of absolute secrecy for a long time,
since it would be dangerous to trust any neighbor whose fidelity is not perfectly established. The
reprisals of the enemy are so violent, usually so brutal, inflicted not only on the head of the family
but frequently on the women and children as well, that pressure on individuals lacking firmness
may result at any moment in their giving way and revealing information as to where the guerrilla

band is located and how it is operating. This would immediately produce an encirclement with
consequences always disagreeable, although not necessarily fatal. When conditions, the quantity of
arms, and the state of insurrection of the people call for an increase in the number of men, the
guerrilla band should be divided. If it is necessary, all can rejoin at a given moment to deal a blow,
but in such a way that immediately afterwards they can disperse toward separate zones, a gain
divided into small groups of ten, twelve, or fifteen men.
It is entirely feasible to organize whole armies under a single command and to assure respect and
obedience to this command without the necessity of being in a single group. Therefore the election
of the guerrilla chiefs and the certainty that they coordinate ideologically and personally with the
overall chief of the zone are very important.
The bazooka is a heavy weapon that can be used by the guerrilla band because of its easy portability
and operation. Today the rifle-fired anti-tank grenade can replace it. Naturally, it will be a weapon
taken from the enemy. The bazooka is ideal for firing on armored vehicles, and even on unarmored
vehicles that are loaded with troops, and for taking small military bases of few men in a short time;
but it is important to point out that not more than three shells per man can be carried, and this only
with considerable exertion.
As for the utilization of heavy arms taken from the enemy, nothing is to be scorned. But there are
weapons such as the tripod machine gun, the heavy fifty-millimeter machine gun3 etc., that, when
captured, can be utilized with a willingness to lose them again. In other words, in the unfavorable
conditions that we are now analyzing, a battle to defend a heavy machine gun or other weapon of
this type cannot be allowed; they are simply to be used until the tactical moment when they must be
abandoned. In our Cuban war of liberation, to abandon a weapon constituted a grave offense, and
there was never any case where the necessity arose. Nevertheless, we mention this case in order to
explain clearly the only situation in which abandonment would not constitute an occasion for
reproaches. On unfavorable ground, the guerrilla weapon is the personal weapon of rapid fire.
Easy access to the zone usually means that it will be habitable and that there will be a peasant
population in these places. This facilitates supply enormously. Having trustworthy people and
making contact with establishments that provide supplies to the population, it is possible to
maintain a guerrilla band perfectly well without having to devote time or money to long and
dangerous lines of communication. Also it is well to reiterate that the smaller the number of men the
easier it will be to procure food for them. Essential supplies such as bedding, waterproof material,
mosquito netting, shoes, medicines, and food will be found directly in the zone, since they are
things of daily use by its inhabitants.
Communications will be much easier in the sense of being able to count on a larger number of men
and more roads; but they will be more difficult as a problem of security for messages between
distant points, since it will be necessary to rely on a series of contacts that have to be trusted. There
will be the danger of an eventual capture of one of the messengers, who are constantly crossing
enemy zones. If the messages are of small importance, they should be oral; if of great importance,
code writing should be used. Experience shows that transmission by word of mouth greatly distorts
any communication.
For these same reasons manufacture will have much less importance, at the same time that it would
be much more difficult to carry it out. It will not be possible to have factories making shoes or arms.
Practically speaking, manufacture will have to be limited to small shops, carefully hidden, where
shotgun shells can be recharged and mines, simple grenades, and other minimum necessities of the
moment manufactured. On the other hand, it is possible to make use of all the friendly shops of the
zone for such work as is necessary.

This brings us to two consequences that flow logically from what has been said. One of them is that
the favorable conditions for establishing a permanent camp in guerrilla warfare are inverse to the
degree of productive development of a place. All favorable conditions, all facilities of life normally
induce men to settle; but for the guerrilla band the opposite is the case. The more facilities there are
for social life, the more nomadic, the more uncertain the life of the guerrilla fighter. These really are
the results of one and the same principle. The title of this section is "War on Unfavorable Ground,"
because everything that is favorable to human life, communications, urban and semi-urban
concentrations of large numbers of people, land easily worked by machine, all these place the
guerrilla fighter in a disadvantageous situation.
The second conclusion is that if guerrilla fighting must include me extremely important faction of
work on the masses, this work is even more important in the unfavorable zones, where a single
enemy attack can produce a catastrophe. Indoctrination should be continuous, and so should be the
struggle for unity of the workers, of the peasants, and of other social classes that live in the zone, in
order to achieve toward the guerrilla fighters a maximum homogeneity of attitude. This task with
the masses, this constant work at the huge problem of relations of the guerrilla band with the
inhabitants of the zone, must also govern the attitude to be taken toward the case of an individual
recalcitrant enemy soldier: he should be eliminated without hesitation when he is dangerous. In this
respect the guerrilla band must be drastic. Enemies cannot be permitted to exist within the zone of
operations in places that offer no security.
6. SUBURBAN WARFARE

If during the war the guerrilla bands close in on cities and penetrate the surrounding country in such
a way as to be able to establish themselves in conditions of some security, it will be necessary to
give these suburban bands a special education, or rather, a special organization.
It is fundamental to recognize that a suburban guerrilla band can never spring up of its own accord.
It will be born only after certain conditions necessary for its survival have been created. Therefore,
the suburban guerrilla will always be under the direct orders of chiefs located in another zone. The
function of this guerrilla band will not be to carry out independent actions but to coordinate its
activities with overall strategic plans in such a way as to support the action of larger groups situated
in another area, contributing specifically to the success of a fixed tactical objective, without the
operational freedom of guerrilla bands of the other types. For example, a suburban band will not be
able to choose among the operations of destroying telephone lines, moving to make attacks in
another locality, and surprising a patrol of soldiers on a distant road; it will do exactly what it is
told. If its function is to cut down telephone poles or electric wires, to destroy sewers, railroads, or
water mains, it will limit itself to carrying out these tasks efficiently.
It ought not to number more than four or five men. The limitation on numbers is important, because
the suburban guerrilla must be considered as situated in exceptionally unfavorable ground, where
the vigilance of the enemy will be much greater and the possibilities of reprisals as well as of
betrayal are increased enormously. Another aggravating circumstance is that the suburban guerrilla
band cannot depart far from the places where it is going to operate. To speed of action and
withdrawal there must be added a limitation on the distance of withdrawal from the scene of action
and the need to remain totally hidden during the daytime. This is a nocturnal guerrilla band in the
extreme, without possibilities of changing its manner of operating until the insurrection is so far
advanced that it can take part as an active combatant in the siege of the city.

The essential qualities of the guerrilla fighter in this situation are discipline (perhaps in the highest
degree of all) and discretion. He cannot count on more than two or three friendly houses that will
provide food; it is almost certain that an encirclement in these conditions will be equivalent to
death. Weapons, furthermore, will not be of the same kind as those of the other groups. They will
be for personal defense, of the type that do not hinder a rapid flight or betray a secure hiding place.
As their armament the band ought to have not more than one carbine or one sawed-off shotgun, or
perhaps two, with pistols for the other members.
They will concentrate their action on prescribed sabotage and never carry out armed attacks, except
by surprising one or two members or agents of the enemy troops.
For sabotage they need a full set of instruments. The guerrilla fighter must have good saws, large
quantities of dynamite, picks and shovels, apparatus for lifting rails, and, in general, adequate
mechanical equipment for the work to be carried out. This should be hidden in places that are secure
but easily accessible to the hands that will need to use it.
If there is more than one guerrilla band, they will all be under a single chief who will give orders as
to the necessary tasks through contacts of proven trustworthiness who live openly as ordinary
citizens. In certain cases the guerrilla fighter will be able to maintain his peacetime work, but this is
very difficult. Practically speaking, the suburban guerrilla band is a group of men who are already
outside the law, in a condition of war, situated as unfavorably as we have described.
The importance of a suburban struggle has usually been underestimated; it is really very great. A
good operation of this type extended over a wide area paralyzes almost completely the commercial
and industrial life of the sector and places the entire population in a situation of unrest, of anguish,
almost of impatience for the development of violent events that will relieve the period of suspense.
If from the first moment of the war, thought is taken for the future possibility of this type of fight
and an organization of specialists started, a much more rapid action will be assured, and with it a
saving of lives and of the priceless time of the nation.

CHAPTER II: THE GUERRILLA BAND
1. THE GUERRILLA FIGHTER: SOCIAL REFORMER

[Che Guevara with Chile's president Salvador Allende] We have already described the guerrilla
fighter as one who shares the longing of the people for liberation and who, once peaceful means are
exhausted, initiates the fight and converts himself into an armed vanguard of the fighting people.
From the very beginning of the struggle he has the intention of destroying an unjust order and
therefore an intention, more or less hidden, to replace the old with something new.
We have also already said that in the conditions that prevail, at least in America and in almost all
countries with deficient economic development, it is the countryside that offers ideal conditions for
the fight. Therefore the foundation of the social structure that the guerrilla fighter will build begins
with changes in the ownership of agrarian property.
The banner of the fight throughout this period will be agrarian reform. At first this goal may or may
not be completely delineated in its extent and limits; it may simply refer to the age-old hunger of the

peasant for the land on which he works or wishes to work.
The conditions in which the agrarian reform will be realized depend upon the conditions which
existed before the struggle began, and on the social depth of the struggle. But the guerrilla fighter,
as a person conscious of a role in the vanguard of the people, must have a moral conduct that shows
him to be a true priest of the reform to which he aspires. To the stoicism imposed by the difficult
conditions of warfare should be added an austerity born of rigid self-control that will prevent a
single excess, a single slip, whatever the circumstances. The guerrilla soldier should be an ascetic.
As for social relations, these will vary with the development of the war. At the beginning it will not
be possible to attempt any changes in the social order.
Merchandise that cannot be paid for in cash will be paid for with bonds; and these should be
redeemed at the first opportunity.
The peasant must always be helped technically, economically, morally, and culturally. The guerrilla
fighter will be a sort of guiding angel who has fallen into the zone, helping the poor always and
bothering the rich as little as possible in the first phases of the war. But this war will continue on its
course; contradictions will continuously become sharper; the moment will arrive when many of
those who regarded the revolution with a certain sympathy at the outset will place themselves in a
position diametrically opposed; and they will take the first step into battle against the popular
forces. At that moment the guerrilla fighter should act to make himself into the standard bearer of
the cause of the people, punishing every betrayal with justice. Private property should acquire in the
war zones its social function. For example, excess land and livestock not essential for the
maintenance of a wealthy family should pass into the hands of the people and be distributed
equitably and justly.
The right of the owners to receive payment for possessions used for the social good ought always to
be respected; but this payment will be made in bonds ("bonds of hope," as they were called by our
teacher, General Bayo,3 referring to the common interest that is thereby established between debtor
and creditor). The land and property of notorious and active enemies of the revolution should pass
immediately into the hands of the revolutionary forces, Furthermore, taking advantage of the heat of
the war-those moments in which human fraternity reaches its highest intensity-all kinds of
cooperative work, as much as the mentality of the inhabitants will permit, ought to be stimulated.
The guerrilla fighter as a social reformer should not only provide an example in his own life but he
ought also constantly to give orientation in ideological problems, explaining what he knows and
what he wishes to do at the right time. He will also make use of what he learns as the months or
years of the war strengthen his revolutionary convictions, making him more radical as the potency
of arms is demonstrated, as the outlook of the inhabitants becomes a part of his spirit and of his own
life, and as he understands the justice and the vital necessity of a series of changes, of which the
theoretical importance appeared to him be-fore, but devoid of practical urgency.
This development occurs very often, because the initiators of guerrilla warfare or rather the
directors of guerrilla warfare, are not men who have bent their backs day after day over the furrow.
They are men who understand the necessity for changes in the social treatment accorded peasants,
without having suffered in the usual case this bitter treatment in their own persons. It happens then
(I am drawing on the Cuban experience and enlarging it) that a genuine interaction is produced
between these leaders, who with their acts teach the people the fundamental importance of the
armed fight, and the people themselves who rise in rebellion and teach the leaders these practical
necessities of which we speak. Thus, as a product of this interaction between the guerrilla fighter
and his people, a progressive radicalization appears which further accentuates the revolutionary

characteristics of the movement and gives it a national scope.
2 THE GUERRILLA FIGHTER AS COMBATANT

The life and activities of the guerrilla fighter, sketched thus in their general lines, call for a series of
physical, mental, and moral qualities needed for adapting oneself to prevailing conditions and for
fulfilling completely any mission assigned.
To the question as to what the guerrilla soldier should be like, the first answer is that he should
preferably be an inhabitant of the zone. If this is the case, he will have friends who will help him; if
he belongs to the zone itself, he will know it (and this knowledge of the ground is one of the most
important factors in guerrilla warfare); and since he will be habituated to local peculiarities he will
be able to do better work, not to mention that he will add to all this the enthusiasm that arises from
defending his own people and fighting to change a social regime that hurts his own world.
The guerrilla combatant is a night combatant; to say this is to say at the same time that he must have
all the special qualities that such fighting requires. He must be cunning and able to march to the
place of attack across plains or mountains without anybody noticing him, and then to fall upon the
enemy, taking advantage of the factor of surprise which deserves to be emphasized again as
important in this type of fight. After causing panic by this surprise, he should launch himself into
the fight implacably without permitting a single weakness in his companions and taking advantage
of every sign of weakness on the part of the enemy. Striking like a tornado, destroying all, giving no
quarter unless the tactical circumstances call for it, judging those who must be judged, sowing panic
among the enemy combatants, he nevertheless treats defenseless prisoners benevolently and shows
respect for the dead.
A wounded enemy should be treated with care and respect unless his former life has made him
liable to a death penalty, in which case he will be treated in accordance with his deserts. What can
never be done is to keep prisoners, unless a secure base of operations, invulnerable to the enemy,
has been established. Otherwise, the prisoner will become a dangerous menace to the security of the
inhabitants of the region or to the guerrilla band itself because of the information that he can give
upon rejoining the enemy army. If he has not been a notorious criminal, he should be set free after
receiving a lecture.
The guerrilla combatant ought to risk his life whenever necessary and be ready to die without the
least sign of doubt; but, at the same time, he ought to be cautious and never expose himself
unnecessarily. All possible precautions ought to be taken to avoid a defeat or an annihilation. For
this reason it is extremely important in every fight to maintain vigilance over all the points from
which enemy reinforcements may arrive and to take precautions against an encirclement, the
consequences of which are usually not physically disastrous but which damages morale by causing
a loss of faith in the prospects of the struggle.
However, he ought to be audacious, and, after carefully analyzing the dangers and possibilities in an
action, always ready to take an optimistic attitude toward circumstances and to see reasons for a
favorable decision even in moments when the analysis of the adverse and favorable conditions does
not show an appreciable positive balance.
To be able to survive in the midst of these conditions of life and enemy action, the guerrilla fighter
must have a degree of adaptability that will permit him to identify himself with the environment in
which he lives, to become a part of it, and to take advantage of it as his ally to the maximum

possible extent. He also needs a faculty of rapid comprehension and an instantaneous inventiveness
that will permit him to change his tactics according to the dominant course of the action.
These faculties of adaptability and inventiveness in popular armies are what ruin the statistics of the
warlords and cause them to waver.
The guerrilla fighter must never for any reason leave a wounded companion at the mercy of the
enemy troops, because this would be leaving him to an almost certain death. At whatever cost he
must be removed from the zone of combat to a secure place. The greatest exertions and the greatest
risks must be taken in this task. The guerrilla soldier must be an extraordinary companion.
At the same time he ought to be closemouthed. Everything that is said and done before him should
be kept strictly in his own mind. He ought never to permit himself a single useless word, even with
his own comrades in arms, since the enemy will always try to introduce spies into the ranks of the
guerrilla band in order to discover its plans, location, and means of life.
Besides the moral qualities that we have mentioned, the guerrilla fighter should possess a series of
very important physical qualities. He must be indefatigable. He must be able to produce another
effort at the moment when weariness seems intolerable. Profound conviction, expressed in every
line of his face, forces him to take another step, and this not the last one, since it will be followed by
another and another and another until he arrives at the place designated by his chiefs.
He ought to be able to endure extremities, to with-stand not only the privations of food, water,
clothing, and shelter to which he is subjected frequently, but also the sickness and wounds that
often must be cured by nature without much help from the surgeon. This is all the more necessary
because usually the enemy will assassinate the individual who leaves the guerrilla zone to recover
from sickness or wounds.
To meet these conditions he needs an iron constitution that will enable him to resist all these
adversities without falling ill and to make of his hunted animal's life one more factor of strength.
With the help of his natural adaptability, he becomes a part of the land it-self where he fights.
All these considerations bring us to ask: what is the ideal age for the guerrilla fighter? These limits
are al-ways very difficult to state precisely, because individual and social peculiarities change the
figure. A peasant, for example, will be much more resistant than a man from the city. A city dweller
who is accustomed to physical exercise and a healthy life will be much more efficient than a man
who has lived all his life be-hind a desk. But generally the maximum age of combatants in the
completely nomadic stage of the guerrilla struggle ought not to exceed forty years, although there
will be exceptional cases, above all among the peasants. One of the heroes of our struggle,
Commandant Crescencio Perez, entered the Sierra at 65 years of age and was immediately one of
the most useful men in the troop.
We might also ask if the members of the guerrilla band should be drawn from a certain social class.
It has already been said that this social composition ought to be adjusted to that of the zone chosen
for the center of operations, which is to say that the combatant nucleus of the guerrilla army ought
to be made up of peasants. The peasant is evidently the best soldier; but the other strata of the
population are not by any means to be excluded or deprived of the opportunity to fight for a just
cause. Individual exceptions are also very important in this respect.
We have not yet fixed the lower limit of age. We believe that minors less than sixteen years of age
ought not to be accepted for the fight, except in very special circumstances. In general these young
boys, only children, do not have sufficient development to bear tip under the work, the weather, and

the suffering to which they will be subjected.
The best age for a guerrilla fighter varies between 25 and 35 years, a stage in which the life of most
per- sons has assumed definite shape. Whoever sets out at that age, abandoning his home, his
children, and his entire world must have thought well of his responsibility and reached a firm
decision not to retreat a step. There are extraordinary cases of children who as combatants have
reached the highest ranks of our rebel army, but this is not the usual case. For every one of them
who displayed great fighting qualities, there were tens who ought to have been returned to their
homes and who frequently constituted a dangerous burden for the guerrilla band.
The guerrilla fighter, as we have said, is a soldier who carries his house on his back like the snail;
therefore, he must arrange his knapsack in such a way that the smallest quantity of utensils will
render the greatest possible service. He will carry only the indispensable, but he will take care of it
at all times as something fundamental and not to be lost except in extremely adverse situations.
His armament will also be only that which he can carry on his own. Reprovisioning is very difficult,
above all with bullets. To keep them dry, always to keep them clean, to count them one by one so
that none is lost; these are the watchwords. And the gun ought always to be kept clean, well
greased, and with the barrel shining. It is advisable for the chief of each group to impose some
penalty or punishment on those who do not maintain their armaments in these conditions.
People with such notable devotion and firmness must have an ideal that sustains them in the adverse
conditions that we have described. This ideal is simple, without great pretensions, and in general
does not go very far; but it is so firm, so clear that one will give his life for it without the least
hesitation. With almost all peasants this ideal is the right to have and work a piece of land of their
own and to enjoy just social treatment. Among workers it is to have work, to receive an adequate
wage as well as just social treatment. Among students and professional people more abstract ideas
such as liberty are found to be motives for the fight.
This brings us to the question: what is the life of the guerrilla fighter like? His normal life is the
long hike. Let us take as an example a mountain guerrilla fighter located in wooded regions under
constant harassment by the enemy. In these conditions the guerrilla band moves during daylight
hours, without eating, in order to change its position; when night arrives, camp is set up in a
clearing near a water supply according to a routine, each group assembling in order to eat in
common; at dusk the fires are lighted with whatever is at hand.
The guerrilla fighter eats when he can and everything he can. Sometimes fabulous feasts disappear
in the gullet of the combatant; at other times he fasts for two or three days without suffering any
diminution in his capacity for work.
His house will be the open sky; between it and his hammock he places a sheet of waterproof nylon
and beneath the cloth and hammock he places his knapsack, gun, and ammunition, which are the
treasures of the guerrilla fighter. At times it is not wise for shoes to be removed, because of the
possibility of a surprise attack by the enemy. Shoes are another of his precious treasures. Whoever
has a pair of them has the security of a happy existence within the limits of the prevailing
circumstances.
Thus, the guerrilla fighter will live for days without approaching any inhabited place, avoiding all
contact that has not been previously arranged, staying in the wildest zones, knowing hunger, at
times thirst, cold, heat; sweating during the continuous marches, letting the sweat dry on his body
and adding to it new sweat without any possibility of regular cleanliness (although this also depends
somewhat upon the individual disposition, as does everything else).

During the recent war, upon entering the village of El Uvero following a march of sixteen
kilometers and a fight of two hours and forty-five minutes in a hot sun (all added to several days
passed in very adverse conditions along the sea with intense heat from a boiling sun) our bodies
gave off a peculiar and offensive odor that repelled anyone who came near. Our noses were
completely habituated to this type of life; the hammocks of guerrilla fighters are known for their
characteristic, individual odor.
In such conditions breaking camp ought to be done rapidly, leaving no traces behind; vigilance
must be extreme. For every ten men sleeping there ought to be one or two on watch, with the
sentinels being changed continually and a sharp vigil being maintained over all entrances to the
camp.
Campaign life teaches several tricks for preparing meals, some to help speed their preparation;
others to add seasoning with little things found in the forest; still others for inventing new dishes
that give a more varied character to the guerrilla menu, which is com-posed mainly of roots, grains,
salt, a little oil or lard, and, very sporadically, pieces of the meat of some animal that has been slain.
This refers to the life of a group operating in tropical sectors.
Within the framework of the combatant life, the most interesting event, the one that carries all to a
convulsion of joy and puts new vigor in everybody's steps, is the battle. The battle, climax of the
guerrilla life, is sought at an opportune moment either when an enemy encampment sufficiently
weak to be annihilated has been located and investigated; or when an enemy column is advancing
directly toward the territory occupied by the liberating force. The two cases are different.
Against an encampment the action will be a thin encirclement and fundamentally will become a
hunt for the members of the columns that come to break the encirclement. An entrenched enemy is
never the favorite prey of the guerrilla fighter; he prefers his enemy to be on the move, nervous, not
knowing the ground, fearful of everything and without natural protections for defense. Whoever is
behind a parapet with powerful arms for repelling an offensive will never be in the plight, however
bad his situation, of a long column that is attacked suddenly in two or three places and cut. If the
attackers are not able to encircle the column and destroy it totally, they will retire prior to any
counteraction.
If there is no possibility of defeating those entrenched in a camp by means of hunger or thirst or by
a direct assault, the guerrilla ought to retire after the encirclement has yielded its fruits of
destruction in the relieving columns. In cases where the guerrilla column is too weak and the
invading column too strong, the action should be concentrated upon the vanguard. There should be
a special preference for this tactic, whatever the hoped-for result, since after the leading ranks have
been struck several times, thus diffusing among the soldiers the news that death is constantly
occurring to those in the van, the reluctance to occupy those places will provoke nothing less than
mutiny. Therefore, attacks ought to be made on that point even if they are also made at other points
of the column.
The facility with which the guerrilla fighter can perform his function and adapt himself to the
environment will depend upon his equipment. Even though joined with others in small groups, he
has individual characteristics. He should have in his knapsack, besides his regular shelter,
everything necessary to survival in case he finds himself alone for some time.
In giving the list of equipment we will refer essentially to that which should be carried by an
individual located in rough country at the beginning of a war, with frequent rainfall, some cold
weather, and harassment by the enemy; in other words, we place ourselves in the situation that

existed at the beginning of the Cuban war of liberation.
The equipment of the guerrilla fighter is divided into the essential and the accessory. Among the
first is a hammock. This provides adequate rest; it is easy to find two trees from which it can be
strung (see Picture 2-1); and, in cases where one sleeps on the ground, it can serve as a mattress.
Whenever it is raining or the ground is wet, a frequent occurrence in tropical mountain zones, the
hammock is indispensable for sleeping. A piece of waterproof nylon cloth is its complement. The
nylon should be large enough to cover the hammock when tied from its four corners, and with a line
strung through the center to the same trees from which the hammock hangs. This last line serves to
make the nylon into a kind of tent by raising a center ridge and causing it to shed water.
A blanket is indispensable, because it is cold in the mountains at night. It is also necessary to carry a
garment such as a jacket or coat which will enable one to bear the extreme changes of temperature.
Clothing should consist of rough work trousers and shirt which may or may not be of a uniform
cloth. Shoes should be of the best possible construction and also, since without good shoes marches
are very difficult they should be one of the first articles laid up in reserve.
Since the guerrilla fighter carries his house in his knapsack, the latter is very important. The more
primitive types may be made from any kind of sack carried by two ropes; but those of canvas found
in the market or made by a harness maker are preferable. The guerrilla fighter ought always to carry
some personal food besides that which the troop carries or consumes in its camps. Indispensable
articles are lard or oil, which is necessary for fat consumption; canned goods, which should not be
consumed except in circumstances where food for cooking cannot be found or when there are too
many cans and their weight impedes the march; preserved fish, which has great nutritional value;
condensed milk, which is also nourishing, particularly on account of the large quantity of sugar that
it contains; some sweet for its good taste. Powdered milk can also be carried. Sugar is another
essential part of the supplies, as is salt, without which life becomes sheer martyrdom, and
something that serves to season the meals, such as onion, garlic, etc., according to the
characteristics of the country. This completes the category of the essentials.
The guerrilla fighter should carry a plate, knife, and fork, camping style, which will serve all the
various necessary functions. The plate can be camping or military type or a pan that is usable for
cooking anything from a piece of meat to a potato, or for brewing tea or coffee.
To care for the rifle, special greases are necessary; and these must be carefully administered-sewing
machine oil is very good if there is no special oil avail-able. Also needed are cloths that will serve
for cleaning the arms frequently and a rod for cleaning the gun inside, something that ought to be
done often. The ammunition belt can be of commercial type or homemade, according to the
circumstances, but it ought to be so made that not a single bullet will be lost. Ammunition is the
basis of the fight without which everything else would be in vain; it must be cared for like gold.
A canteen or a bottle for water is essential, since it will frequently be necessary to drink in a
situation where water is not available. Among medicines, those of general use should be carried: for
example, penicillin or some other type of antibiotic, preferably the types taken orally, carefully
closed; medicines for lowering fever, such as aspirin; and others adapted to treating the endemic
diseases of the area. These may be tablets against malaria, sulfas for diarrhea, medicines against
parasites of all types; in other words, fit the medicine to the characteristics of the region. It is
advisable in places where there are poisonous animals to carry appropriate injections. Surgical
instruments will complete the medical equipment. Small personal items for taking care of less
important injuries should also be included.
A customary and extremely important comfort in the life of the guerrilla fighter is a smoke, whether

cigars, cigarettes, or pipe tobacco; a smoke in moments of rest is a great friend to the solitary
soldier. Pipes are useful, because they permit using to the extreme all tobacco that remains in the
butts of cigars and cigarettes at time of scarcity. Matches are extremely important not only for
lighting a smoke, but also for starting fires; this is one of the great problems in the forest in rainy
periods. It is preferable to carry both matches and a lighter, so that if the lighter runs out of fuel,
matches remain as a substitute.
Soap should be carried, not only for personal cleanliness, but for washing eating utensils, because
intestinal infections or irritations are frequent and can be caused by spoiled food left on dirty
cooking ware. With this set of equipment, the guerrilla fighter can be assured that he will be able to
live in the forest under adverse conditions, no matter how bad, for as long as is necessary to
dominate the situation.
There are accessories that at times are useful and others that constitute a bother but are very useful.
The compass is one of these; at the outset this will be used a great deal in gaining orientation, but
little by little knowledge of the country will make it unnecessary. In mountainous regions a
compass is not of much use, since the route it indicates will usually be cut off by impassable
obstacles. Another useful article is an extra nylon cloth for covering all equipment when it rains.
Remember that rain in tropical countries is continuous during certain months and that water is the
enemy of all the things that the guerrilla fighter must carry: food, ammunition, medicine, paper, and
clothing.
A change of clothing can be carried, but this is usually a mark of inexperience. The usual custom is
to carry no more than an extra pair of pants, eliminating extra underwear and other articles, such as
towels. The life of the guerrilla fighter teaches him to con-serve his energy in carrying his knapsack
from one place to another, and he will, little by little, get rid of everything that does not have
essential value.
In addition to a piece of soap, useful for washing utensils as well as for personal cleanliness, a
toothbrush and paste should be carried. It is worthwhile also to carry a book, which will be
exchanged with other members of the band. These books can be good biographies of past heroes,
histories, or economic geographies, preferably of the country, and works of general character that
will serve to raise the cultural level of the soldiers and discourage the tendency toward gambling or
other undesirable forms of passing the time. There are periods of boredom in the life of the guerrilla
fighter.
Whenever there is extra space in the knapsack1 it ought to be used for food, except in those zones
where the food supply is easy and sure. Sweets or food of lesser importance complementing the
basic items can be carried. Crackers can be one of these, although they occupy a large space and
break up into crumbs. In thick forests a machete is useful; in very wet places a small bottle of
gasoline or light, resinous wood, such as pine, for kindling will make firebuilding easier when the
wood is wet.
A small notebook and pen or pencil for taking notes and for letters to the outside or communication
with other guerrilla bands ought always to be a part of the guerrilla fighter's equipment. Pieces of
string or rope should be kept available; these have many uses. Also needles, thread, and buttons for
clothing. The guerrilla fighter who carries this equipment will have a solid house on his back, rather
heavy but furnished to assure a comfortable life during the hardships of the campaign.
3. ORGANIZATION OF A GUERRILLA BAND

No rigid scheme can be offered for the organization of a guerrilla band; there will be innumerable
differences according to the environment in which it is to operate. For convenience of exposition we
will suppose that our experience has a universal application, but it should be kept in mind that it is
only one way, that there will possibly be new forms that may work better with the particular
characteristics of another given armed group.
The size of the component units of the guerrilla force is one of the most difficult problems to deal
with: there will be different numbers of men and different compositions of the troop, as we have
already explained. Let us suppose a force situated in favorable ground, mountainous with conditions
not so bad as to necessitate perpetual flight, but not so good as to afford a base of operations. The
combat units of an armed force thus situated ought to number not more than one hundred and fifty
men, and even this number is rather high; ideal would be a unit of about one hundred men. This
constitutes a column, and in the Cuban organization is commanded by a commandant. It should be
remembered that in our war the grades of corporal and sergeant were omitted because they were
considered reminiscent of the tyranny.
On this premise, the commandant commands this whole force of one hundred to one hundred fifty
men; and there will be as many captains as there are groups of thirty to forty men. The captain has
the function of directing and unifying his platoon, making it fight almost always as a unit and
looking after the distribution of men and the general organization. In guerrilla warfare, the squad is
the functional unit. Each squad, made up of approximately eight to twelve men, is commanded by a
lieutenant, who performs for his group functions analogous to those of the captain, to whom he
must always be in constant subordination.
The operational tendency of the guerrilla band to function in small groups makes the squad the true
unit. Eight to ten men are the maximum that can act as a unit in a fight in these conditions:
therefore, the squad, which will frequently be separated from the captain even though they fight on
the same front, will operate under the orders of its lieutenant; there are exceptions, of course. A
squad should not be broken up nor kept dispersed at times when there is no fighting. Each squad
and platoon should know who the immediate successor is in case the chief falls, and these persons
should be sufficiently trained to be able to take over their new responsibilities immediately.
One of the fundamental problems of the troop is food supply; in this everyone from the last man to
the chief must be treated alike. This acquires a high importance, not only because of the chronic
shortage of supplies, but also because meals are the only events that take place daily. The troops,
who have a keen sense of justice, measure the rations with a sharp eye; the least favoritism for
anyone ought never to be permitted. If in certain circumstances the meal is served to the whole
column, a regular order should be established and observed strictly, and at the same time the
quantity and quality of food given to each one ought to be carefully checked. In the distribution of
clothing the problem is different, these being articles of individual use. Here two considerations
prevail: first, the demand for necessities of those who need them, which will almost always be
greater than the supply; and, second, the length of service and merits of each one of the applicants.
The length of service and merits, something very difficult to fix exactly, should be noted in special
booklets by one assigned this responsibility under the direct supervision of the chief of the column.
The same should be said about other articles that become available and are of individual rather than
collective utility. Tobacco and cigarettes ought to be distributed according to the general rule of
equal treatment for everybody.
This task of distribution should be a specifically assigned responsibility. It is preferable that the
persons designated be attached directly to the command. The command performs, therefore,
administrative tasks of liaison which are very important as well as all the other special tasks that are

necessary. Officers of the greatest intelligence ought to be in. it. Soldiers attached to the command
ought to be alert and of maximum dedication, since their burdens will usually be greater than those
borne by the rest of the troop. Nevertheless, they can have no special treatment at mealtime.
Each guerrilla fighter carries his complete equipment; there is also a series of implements of use to
the group that should be equitably distributed within the column. For this, too, rules can be
established, de- pending upon the number of unarmed persons in the troop. One system is to
distribute all extra materiel, such as medicines, medical or dental or surgical instruments, extra
food, clothing, general supplies, and heavy weapons equally among all platoons, which will then be
responsible for their custody. Each captain will distribute these supplies among the squads, and each
chief of squad will distribute them among his men. Another solution, which can be used when a part
of the troop is not armed, is to create special squads or platoons assigned to transport; this works out
well, since it leaves the soldier who already has the weight and responsibility of his rifle free of
extra cargo. In this way danger of losing materiel is reduced, since it is concentrated; and at the
same time there is an incentive for the porter to carry more and to carry better and to demonstrate
more enthusiasm, since in this way he will win his right to a weapon in the future. These platoons
will march in the rear positions and will have the same duties and the same treatment as the rest of
the troop.
The tasks to be carried out by a column will vary according to its activities. If it is encamped, there
will be special teams for keeping watch. These should be experienced, specially trained, and they
should receive some special reward for this duty. This can consist of increased independence, or, if
there is an excess of sweets or tobacco after proportional distribution to each column, something
extra for the members of those units that carry out special tasks. For example, if there are one
hundred men and one hundred and fifteen packages of cigarettes, the fifteen extra packs of
cigarettes can be distributed among the members of the units referred to. The vanguard and the
rearguard units, separated from the rest, will have special duties of vigilance; but, besides, each
platoon ought to have such a watch of its own. The farther from the encampment the watch is
maintained, the greater is the security of the group, especially when it is in open country.
The places chosen should be high, dominating a wide area by day and difficult to approach by
night. If the plan is to stay several days, it is worthwhile to construct defenses that will permit a
sustained fire in case of an attack. These defenses can be obliterated when the guerrilla band moves,
or they can be left if circumstances no longer make it necessary to hide the path of the column.
In places where permanent encampments are established, the defenses ought to be improved
constantly. Remember that in a mountainous zone on ground carefully chosen, the only heavy arm
that is effective is the mortar. Using roofs reinforced with materials from the region, such as wood,
rocks, etc., it is possible to make good refuges which are difficult for the enemy forces to approach
and which will afford protection from mortar shells for the guerrilla forces.
It is very important to maintain discipline in the camp, and this should have an educational function.
The guerrilla fighters should be required to go to bed and get up at fixed hours. Games that have no
social function and that hurt the morale of the troops and the consumption of alcoholic drinks
should both be prohibited. All these tasks are performed by a commission of internal order elected
from those combat-ants of greatest revolutionary merit. Another mission of these persons is to
prevent the lighting of fires in places visible from a distance or that raise columns of smoke before
nightfall; also to see. that the camp is kept clean and that it is left in such a condition when the
column leaves as to show no signs of passage, if this is necessary.
Great care must be taken with fires which leave traces for a long time. They must be covered with
earth; papers, cans, and scraps of food should also be burned. During the march complete silence

must prevail in the column. Orders are passed by gestures or by whispers that go from mouth to
mouth until they reach the last man. If the guerrilla band is marching through unknown places,
breaking a road, or being led by a guide, the vanguard will be approximately one hundred or two
hundred meters or even more in front, according to the characteristics of the ground. In places
where confusion may arise as to the route, a man will be left at each turning to await those who
follow, and this will be repeated until the last man in the rearguard has passed. The rearguard will
also be somewhat separated from the rest of the column, keeping a watch on the roads in the rear
and trying to erase tracks of the troops as much as possible. If there is a road coming from the side
that offers danger, it is necessary always to have a group keeping a watch on it until the last man
has passed. It is more practical that each platoon utilize its own men for this special duty, with each
having the obligation to pass the guard to members of the following platoon and then to rejoin his
own unit; this process will be continued until the whole troop has passed.
The march should be uniform and in an established order, always the same. Thus it will always be
known that Platoon #1 is the vanguard, followed by Platoon #2 and then Platoon #3, which may be
the command; then #4, followed by the rearguard or Platoon #5 or other platoons that make up the
column, always in the same order. In night marches silence should be even stricter and the distance
between each combatant shorter, so that no one will get lost and make it necessary to shout and turn
on lights. Light is the enemy of the guerrilla fighter at nighttime.
If all this marching has attack as its objective, then upon arriving at a given point, the point to which
all will return after the objective has been accomplished, extra weight will be set down, such things
as knapsacks and cooking utensils, for example, and each platoon will proceed with nothing more
than its arms and fighting equipment. The point of attack should have been already studied by
trustworthy people who have reconnoitered the ground and have observed the location of the enemy
guards. The leaders, knowing the orientation of the base, the number of men that defend it, etc., will
make the final plan for the attack and send combatants to their places, always keeping in mind that a
good part of the troops should be assigned to intercept reinforcements. In cases where the attack
upon the base is to be merely a diversion in order to provoke the sending of reinforcements along
roads that can be easily ambushed, a man should communicate the result rapidly to the command as
soon as the attack has been carried out, in order to break the encirclement, if necessary to prevent
being attacked from the rear. In any case there must always be a watch on the roads that lead to the
place of combat while the encirclement or direct attack is being carried out.
By night a direct attack is always preferable. It is possible to capture an encampment if there is
enough drive and necessary presence of mind and if the risks are not excessive.
An encirclement requires waiting and taking cover, closing in steadily on the enemy, trying to
harass him in every way, and, above all, trying to force him by fire to come out. When the circle has
been closed to short range, the "Molotov cocktail" is a weapon of extraordinary effectiveness.
Before arriving at a range for the "cocktail," shotguns with a special charge can be employed (See
picture 2-2). These arms, christened in our war with the name of "M-16," consist of a 16-calibre
sawed-off shotgun with a pair of legs added in such a way that with the butt of the gun they form a
tripod. The weapon will thus be mounted at an angle of about 45 degrees; this can be varied by
moving the legs back and forth. It is loaded with an open shell from which all the shot has been
removed. A cylindrical stick extending from the muzzle of the gun is used as the projectile. A bottle
of gasoline resting on a rubber base is placed on the end of the stick. This apparatus will fire the
burning bottles a hundred meters or more with a fairly high degree of accuracy. This is an ideal
weapon for enrichments when the enemy has many wooden or inflammable material constructions;
also for firing against tanks in hilly country.
Once the encirclement ends with a victory, or, having completed its objectives, is withdrawn, all

platoons retire in order to the place where the knapsacks have been left, and normal life is resumed.
The nomadic life of the guerrilla fighter in this stage produces not only a deep sense of fraternity
among the men but at times also dangerous rivalries between groups or platoons. If these are not
channeled to produce beneficial emulation, there is a risk that the unity of the column will be
damaged. The education of the guerrilla fighter is important from the very beginning of the
struggle. This should explain to them the social purpose of the fight and their duties, clarify their
understanding, and give them lessons in morale that serve to forge their characters. Each experience
should be a new source of strength for victory and not simply one more episode in the fight for
survival.
One of the great educational techniques is example. Therefore the chiefs must constantly offer the
example of a pure and devoted life. Promotion of the soldier should be based on valor, capacity, and
a spirit of sacrifice; whoever does not have these qualities in a high degree ought not to have
responsible assignments, since he will cause unfortunate accidents at any moment.
The conduct of the guerrilla fighter will be subject to judgment whenever he approaches a house to
ask for something. The inhabitants will draw favorable or unfavorable conclusions about the
guerrilla band according to the manner in which any service or food or other necessity is solicited
and the methods used to get what is wanted. The explanation by the chief should be detailed about
these problems, emphasizing their importance; he should also teach by example. If a town is
entered, all drinking of alcohol should be prohibited and the troops should be exhorted before- hand
to give the best possible example of discipline.
The entrances and exits to the town should be constantly watched.
The organization, combat capacity, heroism, and spirit of the guerrilla band will undergo a test of
fire during an encirclement by the enemy, which is the most dangerous situation of the war. In the
jargon of our guerrilla fighters in the recent war, the phrase "encirclement face" was given to the
face of fear worn by someone who was frightened. The hierarchy of the deposed regime pompously
spoke of its campaigns of "encirclement and annihilation." However, for a guerrilla band that knows
the country and that is united ideologically and emotionally with its chief, this is not a particularly
serious problem. It need only take cover, try to slow up the advance of the enemy, impede his action
with heavy equipment, and await nightfall, the natural ally of the guerrilla fighter. Then with the
greatest possible stealth, after exploring and choosing the best road, the band will depart, utilizing
the most adequate means of escape and maintaining absolute silence. It is extremely difficult in
these conditions at night to prevent a group of men from escaping the encirclement.
4. THE COMBAT

Combat is the most important drama in the guerrilla life. It occupies only a short time; nevertheless,
these brilliant moments acquire an extraordinary importance, since each small encounter is a battle
of a fundamental kind for the combatants.
We have already pointed out that an attack should be carried out in such a way as to give a
guarantee of victory. In addition to general observations concerning the tactical function of attack in
guerrilla warfare, the different characteristics that each action can pre-sent ought to be noted. We
will refer initially, for purposes of description, to the type of fight carried out on favorable ground,
because this is the original model of guerrilla warfare; and it is in this connection that certain
principles must be examined before dealing with other problems through a study of practical

experience. Warfare on the plain is always the result of an advance by the guerrilla bands
consequent on their being strengthened and on changes in conditions; this implies an increase of
experience on the part of the guerrilla and with it the possibility of using that experience to
advantage.
In the first stage of guerrilla warfare, enemy columns will penetrate insurgent territory deeply;
depending on the strength of these columns two different types of guerrilla attacks will be made.
One of these, first in chronological order, is for a fixed number of months to cause systematic losses
in the enemy's offensive capacity. This tactic is carried out on the vanguards. Unfavorable ground
impedes flank defenses by the advancing columns; therefore, there must always be one point of the
vanguard that, as it penetrates and exposes the lives of its components, serves to give security to the
rest of the column. When men and reserves are insufficient and the enemy is strong, the guerrilla
should always aim for the destruction of this vanguard point. The system is simple; only a certain
coordination is necessary. At the moment when the vanguard appears at the selected place-the
steepest possible-a deadly fire is let loose on them, after a convenient number of men have been
allowed to penetrate. A small group must hold the rest of the column for some moments while arms,
munitions, and equipment are being collected. The guerrilla soldier ought always to have in mind
that his source of supply of arms is the enemy and that, except in special circumstances, he ought
not to engage in a battle that will not lead to the capture of such equipment.
When the strength of the guerrilla band permits, a complete encirclement of the column will be
carried out; or at least this impression will be given. In this case the guerrilla front line must be
strong enough and well enough covered to resist the frontal assaults of the enemy, considering,
naturally, both offensive power and combat morale. At the moment in which the enemy is detained
in some chosen place, the rearguard guerrilla forces make an attack on the enemy's rear. Such a
chosen place will have characteristics making a flank maneuver difficult; snipers, outnumbered,
perhaps, by eight or ten times, will have the whole enemy column within the circle of fire.
Whenever there are sufficient forces in these cases, all roads should be protected with ambushes in
order to detain reinforcements. The encirclement will be closed gradually, above all at night. The
guerrilla fighter knows the places where he fights, the invading column does not; the guerrilla
fighter grows at night, and the enemy feels his fear growing in the darkness.
In this way, without too much difficulty, a column can be totally destroyed; or at least such losses
can be inflicted upon it as to prevent its returning to battle and to force it to take a long time for
regrouping. When the force of the guerrilla band is small and it is desired above all to detain and
slow down the advance of the invading column, groups of snipers fluctuating between two and ten
should be distributed all around the column at each of the four cardinal points. In this situation
combat can be begun, for example, on the right flank; when the enemy centers his action on that
flank and fires on it, shooting will begin at that moment from the left flank; at another moment from
the rearguard or from the vanguard; and so forth.
With a very small expenditure of ammunition it is possible to hold the enemy in check indefinitely.
The technique of attacking an enemy convoy or position must be adapted to the conditions of the
place chosen for the combat. In general, the first at-tack on an encircled place should be made
during night hours against an advance post, with surprise assured. A surprise attack carried out by
skillful commandos can easily liquidate a position, thanks to the advantage of surprise. For a regular
encirclement the paths of escape can be controlled with a few men and the roads of access defended
with ambushes; these should be distributed in such a way that if one is unsuccessful, it falls back or
simply withdraws, while a second remains, and so on successively. In cases where the surprise
factor is not present, victory in an attempt to take an encampment will depend on the capacity of the
encircling force to detain the at-tempts of the rescue columns. In these cases there will usually be

support on the enemy's side by artillery, mortars, airplanes, and tanks. In favorable ground the tank
is an arm of small danger; it must travel by roads that are narrow and is an easy victim of mines.
The offensive capacity of these vehicles when in formation is here generally absent or reduced,
since they must proceed in Indian file or at most two abreast. The best and surest weapon against
the tank is the mine; but in a close fight, which may easily take place in steep places, the "Molotov
cocktail" is an arm of extraordinary value. We will not talk yet of the bazooka, which for the
guerrilla force is a decisive weapon but difficult to acquire, at least in the first stages. Against the
mortar there is the recourse of a trench with a roof. The mortar is an arm of formidable potency
when used against an encircled place; but on the other hand, against mobile attackers it loses its
effectiveness unless it is used in large batteries. Artillery does not have great importance in this type
of fight, since it has to be placed in locations of convenient access and it does not see the targets,
which are constantly shifting. Aviation constitutes the principal arm of the oppressor forces, but its
power of attack also is much reduced by the fact that its only targets are small trenches, generally
hidden. Planes will be able to drop high explosive or napalm bombs, both of which constitute
inconveniences rather than true dangers. Besides, as the guerrilla draws as close as possible to the
defensive lines of the enemy, it becomes very difficult for planes to attack these points of the
vanguard effectively.
When encampments with wood or inflammable constructions are attacked, a Molotov cocktail is a
very important arm at a short distance. At longer distances bottles with inflammable material with
the fuse lighted can be launched from a sixteen-caliber shotgun, as described earlier.
Of all the possible types of mines, the most effective, although requiring the most technical
capacity, is the remotely exploded mine; but contact, fuse, and above all electric mines with their
lengths of cord are also extremely useful and constitute on mountainous roads defenses for the
popular forces that are virtually invulnerable.
A good defense against armored cars along roads is to dig sloping ditches in such a way that the
tank enters them easily and afterwards cannot get out, as Picture 2-3 shows. These can easily be
hidden from the enemy, especially at nighttime or when he has no infantry in advance of the tanks
because of resistance by the guerrilla forces.
Another common form of advance by the enemy in zones that are not too steep is in trucks that are
more or less open. The columns are headed by armored vehicles and the infantry follows behind in
trucks Depending upon the force of the guerrilla band it may be possible to encircle the entire
column, following the general rules; or it can be split by attacking some of the trucks and
simultaneously exploding mines. It is necessary to act rapidly in this case, seizing the arms of the
fallen enemy and retiring.
For an attack on open trucks, an arm of great importance which should be used with all its potential
is the shotgun. A sixteen-caliber shotgun with large shot can sweep ten meters, nearly the whole
area of the truck, killing some of the occupants, wounding others, and provoking an enormous
confusion. Grenades, if they are available, are also excellent weapons for these cases.
For all these attacks surprise is fundamental because, at least at the moment of firing the first shot, it
is one of the basic requirements of guerrilla warfare. Surprise is not possible if the peasants of the
zone know of the presence of the insurgent army. For this reason all movements of attack should be
made at night. Only men of proven discretion and loyalty can know of these movements and
establish the contacts. The march should be made with knapsacks full of food, in order to be able to
live two, three, or four days in the places of ambush.
The discretion of the peasants should never be trusted too much, first because there is a natural

tendency to talk and to comment on events with other members of the family or with friends; and
also because of the inevitable cruelty with which the enemy soldiers treat the population after a
defeat. Terror can be sown, and this terror leads to someone's talking too much, revealing important
information, in the effort to save his life.
In general, the place chosen for an ambush should be located at least one day's march from the
habitual camp of the guerrilla band, since the enemy will al-most always know its location more or
less accurately. We said before that the form of fire in a battle indicates the location of the opposing
forces; on one side violent and rapid firing by the soldier of the line, who has the customary
abundance of ammunition; on the other side the methodical, sporadic fire of the guerrilla fighter
who knows the value of every bullet and who endeavors to expend it with a high degree of
economy, never firing one shot more than necessary. It is not reasonable to allow an enemy to
escape or to fail to use an ambush to the full in order to save ammunition, but the amount that is to
be expended in determined circumstances should be calculated in advance and the action carried out
according to these calculations.
Ammunition is the great problem of the guerrilla fighter. Arms can always be obtained.
Furthermore, those which are obtained are not expended in guerrilla warfare, while ammunition is
expended; also, generally, it is arms with their ammunition that are captured and never or rarely
ammunition only. Each weapon that is taken will have its loads, but it cannot contribute to the
others because there are no extras. The tactical principle of saving fire is fundamental in this type of
warfare.
A guerrilla chief who takes pride in his role will never be careless about withdrawal. This should be
timely, rapid, and carried out so as to save all the wounded and the equipment of the guerrilla, its
knapsacks, ammunition, etc. The rebels ought never to be surprised while withdrawing, nor can
they permit themselves the negligence of becoming surrounded. Therefore, guards must be posted
along the chosen road at all places where the enemy army will eventually bring its troops forward in
an attempt to close a circle; and there must be a system of communication that will permit rapid
reports when a force tries to surround the rebels.
In the combat there must always be some unarmed men. They will recover the guns of companions
who are wounded or dead, guns seized in battle or belonging to prisoners; they will take charge of
the prisoners, of removing the wounded, and of transmission of messages. Besides, there ought to
be a good corps of messengers with iron legs and a proven sense of responsibility who will give the
necessary reports in the least possible time.
The number of men needed besides the armed combatants varies; but a general rule is two or three
for each ten, including those who will be present at the scene of the battle and those who will carry
out necessary tasks in the rearguard, keeping watch on the route of withdrawal and performing the
messenger services mentioned above.
When a defensive type of war is being fought, that is to say, when the guerrilla band is endeavoring
to prohibit the passage of an invasion column beyond a certain point, the action becomes a war of
positions; but always at the outset it should have the factor of surprise. In this case, since trenches as
well as other defensive systems that will be easily observable by the peasants are going to be used,
it is necessary that these latter remain in the friendly zone. In this type of warfare the government
generally establishes a blockade of the region, and the peasants who have not fled must go to buy
their basic foods at establishments located outside the zones of guerrilla action. Should these
persons leave the region at critical moments, such as those we are now describing, this would
constitute a serious danger on account of the information that they could eventually supply to the
enemy army. The policy of complete isolation must serve as the strategic principle of the guerrilla

army in these cases.
The defenses and the whole defensive apparatus should be arranged in such a manner that the
enemy vanguard will always fall into an ambush. It is very important as a psychological factor that
the man in the vanguard will die without escape in every battle, because this produces within the
enemy army a growing consciousness of this danger, until the moment arrives when nobody wants
to be in the vanguard; and it is obvious that a column with no vanguard cannot move, since
somebody has to assume that responsibility. Also encirclements can be carried out if these are
expedient; or diversionary maneuvers such as flank attacks; or the enemy can simply be detained
frontally. In every case, places which are susceptible of being utilized by the enemy for flank
attacks should be fortified.
We are now assuming that more men and arms are available than in the combats described hitherto.
It is evident that the blockade of all possible roads con-verging into a zone, which may be very
numerous, requires a large personnel. The various kinds of traps and attacks against armored
vehicles will be in- creased here, in order to give the greatest security p05-sible to the systems of
fixed trenches which can be located by the enemy. In general in this type of fight the order is to
defend the positions unto death if necessary; and it is essential to assure the maximum possibilities
of survival to every defender.
The more a trench is hidden from distant view, the better; above all, it is important to give it a cover
so that mortar fire will be ineffective. Mortars of 60.1 or 85 millimeters, the usual campaign
caliber's, cannot penetrate a good roof made with simple materials from the region. This may be
made from a base of wood, earth, and rocks covered with some camouflage material. An exit for
escape in an extremity must always be constructed, so that the defender may get away with less
danger.
The sketch [above, See Picture 2-4 ed.] shows the form in which these defenses were constructed in
the Sierra Maestra. They were sufficient to protect us from mortar fire.
This outline clearly indicates that fixed lines of fire do not exist. The lines of fire are something
more or less theoretical; they are established at certain critical moments, but they are extremely
elastic and permeable on both sides.
What does exist is a wide no man's land. But the characteristics of no man's land in guerrilla warfare
are that it is inhabited by a civil population, and that this civil population collaborates in a certain
measure with either of the two sides, even though in an overwhelming majority with the
insurrectionary band. These people cannot be removed en masse from the zone on account of their
numbers and because this would create problems of supply for either one of the con-tenders who
tried to provide food for so many people. This no man's land is penetrated by periodic incursions
(generally during the daytime) by the repressive forces and at night by the guerrilla forces. The
guerrilla forces find there a maintenance base of great importance for their troops; this should be
cared for in a political way, always establishing the best possible relations with the peasants and
merchants.
In this type of warfare the tasks of those who do not carry arms, of those who are not direct combatants, are extremely important. We have already indicated some of the characteristics of liaison in
places of combat; but liaison is an institution throughout the whole guerrilla organization. Liaison
out to the most distant command or out to the most distant group of guerrilla fighters ought to be
linked in such a way that messages will travel from one place to an-other via the most rapid system
available in the region. This holds for regions of easy defense, that is to say, in favorable ground, as
well as in unfavorable ground. A guerrilla band operating in unfavorable ground will not be able to

use modern systems of communication, such as telegraph, roads, etc., except some radios located in
military garrisons capable of being defended. If these fall into the hands of the enemy force, it is
necessary to change codes and frequencies, a task that is rather troublesome.
In all these matters we are speaking from memory of things that occurred in our war of liberation.
The daily and accurate report on all activities of the enemy is complemented with liaison. The
system of espionage should be carefully studied, well worked out, and personnel chosen with
maximum care. The harm that a counter-spy can do is enormous, but even without such an extreme
case, the harm that can result from exaggerated information which misjudges the danger is very
great. It is not probable that danger will be underrated. The tendency of people in the country is to
overrate and exaggerate it. The same magic mentality that makes phantasms and various
supernatural beings appear also creates monstrous armies where there is hardly a platoon or an
enemy patrol. The spy ought to seem as neutral as possible, not known by the enemy to have any
connection with the forces of liberation. This is not as difficult a task as it appears; many such
persons are found in the course of the war: businessmen, professional men, and even clergymen can
lend their help in this type of task and give timely information.
One of the most important characteristics of guerrilla warfare is the notable difference between the
in- formation that reaches the rebel forces and the information possessed by the enemy. While the
latter must operate in regions that are absolutely hostile, finding sullen silence on the part of the
peasants, the rebels have in nearly every house a friend or even a relative; and news is passed about
constantly through the liaison system until it reaches the central command of the guerrilla force or
of the guerrilla group that is in the zone.
When an enemy penetration occurs in territory that has become openly pro-guerrilla, where all the
peasants respond to the cause of the people, a serious problem is created. The majority of peasants
try to escape with the popular army, abandoning their children and their work; others even carry the
whole family; some wait upon events. The most serious problem that an enemy penetration into
guerrilla territory can provoke is that of a group of families finding themselves in a tight, at times
desperate situation. Maximum help should be given to them, but they must be warned of the
troubles that can follow upon a flight into inhospitable zones so far from their habitual places of
livelihood, exposed to the hardships that usually befall in such cases.
It is not possible to describe any pattern of repression on the part of the enemies of the people. Although the general methods of repression are always the same, the enemies of the people act in a
more or less intensely criminal fashion according to the specific social, historic, and economic
circumstances of each place. There are places where the flight of a man into the guerrilla zone,
leaving his family and his house, does not provoke any great reaction. There are others where this is
enough to provoke the burning or seizure of his belongings, and still others where the flight will
bring death to all members of his family. Adequate distribution and organization of the peasants
who are going to be affected by an enemy advance must of course be arranged according to the
habits that prevail in the war zone or country concerned.
Obviously preparations must be made to expel the enemy from such territory by moving against his
sup-plies, completely cutting his lines of communication, destroying by means of small guerrilla
bands his at-tempts to supply himself, and in general forcing him to devote large quantities of men
to his supply problem.
In all these combat situations a very important factor is the correct utilization of reserves wherever
battle begins. The guerrilla army, because of its characteristics, can rarely count on reserves, since it
always strikes in such a way that the efforts of every individual are regulated and employed at
something. Nevertheless, despite these characteristics it should have at someplace, men ready to

respond to an unforeseen development, to detain a counteroffensive, or to take care of a situation at
any moment. Within the organization of the guerrilla band, assuming that the conditions and
possibilities of the moment permit, a utility platoon can be held in readiness, a platoon that should
always go to the places of greatest danger. It can be christened the "suicide platoon" or something
similar; this title in reality indicates its functions. This "suicide platoon" should be in every place
where a battle is decided: in the surprise at-tacks upon the vanguard, in the defense of the most
vulnerable and dangerous places, in a word, wherever the enemy threatens to break the stability of
the line of fire. It ought to be made up strictly of volunteers. Entrance into this platoon should be
regarded almost as a prize for merit. In time it becomes the favorite group of any guerrilla column,
and the guerrilla fighter who wears its insignia enjoys the admiration and respect of all his
companions.
5. BEGINNING, DEVELOPMENT, AND END OF A GUERRILLA WAR

We have now abundantly defined the nature of guerrilla warfare. Let us next describe the ideal
development of such a war from its beginning as a rising by a single nucleus on favorable ground.
In other words, we are going to theorize once more on the basis of the Cuban experience. At the
outset there is a more or less homogeneous group, with some arms, that devotes itself almost
exclusively to hiding in the wildest and most inaccessible places, making little contact with the
peasants. It strikes a fortunate blow and its fame grows. A few peasants, dispossessed of their land
or engaged in a struggle to conserve it and young idealists of other classes join the nucleus; it
acquires greater audacity and starts to operate in inhabited places, making more contact with the
people of the zone; it repeats attacks, always fleeing after making them; suddenly it engages in
combat with some column or other and destroys its vanguard. Men continue to join it; it has
increased in number, but its organization remains exactly the same; its caution diminishes, and it
ventures into more populous zones.
Later it sets up temporary camps for several days; it abandons these upon receiving news of the
approach of the enemy army, or upon suffering bombardments, or simply upon becoming
suspicious that such risks have arisen. The numbers in the guerrilla band increase as work among
the masses operates to make of each peasant an enthusiast for the war of liberation. Finally, an
inaccessible place is chosen, a settled life is initiated, and the first small industries begin to be
established: a shoe factory, a cigar and cigarette factory, a clothing factory, an arms factory, a
bakery, hospitals, possibly a radio transmitter, a printing press, etc.
The guerrilla band now has an organization, a new structure. It is the head of a large movement with
all the characteristics of a small government. A court is established for the administration of justice,
possibly laws are promulgated. and the work of indoctrination of the peasant masses continues,
extended also to workers if there are any near, to draw them to the cause. An enemy action is
launched and defeated; the number of rifles increases; with these the number of men fighting with
the guerrilla band increases. A moment arrives when its radius of action will not have increased in
the same proportion as its personnel; at that moment a force of appropriate size is separated, a
column or a platoon, perhaps, and this goes to another place of combat.
The work of this second group will begin with somewhat different characteristics because of the
experience that it brings and because of the influence of the troops of liberation on the war zone.
The original nucleus also continues to grow; it has now received substantial support in food,
sometimes in guns, from various places; men continue to arrive; the administration of government,
with the promulgation of laws, continues; schools are established, permitting the indoctrination and

training of recruits. The leaders learn steadily as the war develops, and their capacity of command
grows under the added responsibilities of the qualitative and quantitative increases in their forces.
If there are distant territories, a group departs for them at a certain moment, in order to confirm the
advances that have been made and to continue the cycle.
But there will also exist an enemy territory, unfavorable for guerrilla warfare. There small groups
begin to penetrate, assaulting the roads, destroying bridges, planting mines, sowing disquiet. With
the ups and downs characteristic of warfare the movement continues to grow; by this time the
extensive work among the masses makes easy movement of the forces possible in unfavorable
territory and so opens the final stage, which is suburban guerrilla warfare.
Sabotage increases considerably in the whole zone. Life is paralyzed; the zone is conquered. The
guerrillas then go into other zones, where they fight with the enemy army along defined fronts; by
now heavy arms have been captured, perhaps even some ,tanks; the fight is more equal. The enemy
falls when the process of partial victories becomes transformed into final victories, that is to say,
when the enemy is brought to accept battle in conditions imposed by the guerrilla band; there he is
annihilated and his surrender compelled.
This is a sketch that describes what occurred in the different stages of the Cuban war of liberation;
but it has a content approximating the universal. Nevertheless, it will not always be possible to
count on the degree of intimacy with the people, the conditions, and the leadership that existed in
our war. It is unnecessary to say that Fidel Castro possesses the high qualities of a fighter and
statesman: our path, our struggle, and our triumph we owed to his vision. We cannot say that
without him the victory of the people would not have been achieved; but that victory would
certainly have cost must more and would have been less complete.

CHAPTER III: ORGANIZATION OF THE GUERRILLA
FRONT
1. SUPPLY

A good supply system is of basic importance to the guerrilla hand. A group of men in contact with
the soil must live from the products of this soil and at the same time must see that the livelihood
continues of those who provide the supplies, the peasants; since in the hard guerrilla struggle it is
not possible, above all at the beginning, for the group to dedicate its own energies to producing
supplies, not to mention that these supplies would be easily discovered and destroyed by enemy
forces in a territory likely to be completely penetrated by the action of repressive columns. Supply
in the first stages is always internal.
As the guerrilla struggle develops, it will be necessary to arrange supply from outside the limits or
territory of the combat. At the beginning the band lives solely on what the peasants have; it may be
possible to reach a store occasionally to buy something, but never possible to have lines of supply
since there is no territory in which to establish them. The line of supply and the store of food are
conditioned by the development of the guerrilla struggle.
The first task is to gain the absolute confidence of the inhabitants of the zone; and this confidence is
won by a positive attitude toward their problems, by help and a constant program of orientation, by

the defense of their interests and the punishment of all who attempt to take advantage of the chaotic
moment in which they live in order to use pressure, dispossess the peasants, seize their harvests, etc.
The line should be soft and hard at the same time: soft and with a spontaneous cooperation for all
those who honestly sympathize with the revolutionary movement; hard upon those who are
attacking it outright, fomenting dissentions, or simply communicating important information to the
enemy army.
Little by little the territory will be cleared, and there will then be a greater ease of action. The
fundamental principle that ought to prevail is that of paying always for all merchandise taken from a
friend. This merchandise can consist of crops or of articles from commercial establishments. Many
times they will be donated, but at other times the economic conditions of the peasantry prevent such
donations. There are cases in which the necessities of warfare force the band to take needed food
from stores without paying for it, simply because there is no money. In such cases the merchant
ought always to be given a bond, a promissory note, something that certifies to the debt, "the bonds
of hope" already described. ft is better to use this method only with people who are outside the
limits of the liberated territory, and in such cases to pay as soon as possible all or at least a part of
the debt. When conditions have improved sufficiently to maintain a territory permanently free from
the dominion of the opposing army, it is possible to set up collective plantings, where the peasants
work the land for the benefit of the guerrilla army. In this way an adequate food supply of a
permanent character is guaranteed.
If the number of volunteers for the guerrilla army is much greater than the number of arms, and
political circumstances prevent these men from entering zones dominated by the enemy, the rebel
army can put them to work directly on the land, harvesting crops; this guarantees supply and adds
something to their record of service looking toward future promotion to the status of combatants.
However, it is more advisable that the peasants themselves sow their own crops; this results in work
performed more effectively, with more enthusiasm and skill. When conditions have ripened even
more, it is possible, depending on the crops involved, to arrange purchases of entire harvests in such
a way that they can remain in the field or in warehouses for the use of the army.
When agencies also charged with the duty of supplying the peasant population have been
established, all food supplies will be concentrated in these agencies in order to facilitate a system of
barter among the peasants, with the guerrilla army serving as intermediary.
If conditions continue to improve, taxes can be established; these should be as light as possible,
above all for the small producer. It is important to pay attention to every detail of relations between
the peasant class and the guerrilla army, which is an emanation of that class.
Taxes may be collected in money in some cases, or in the form of a part of the harvest, which will
serve to increase the food supplies. Meat is one of the articles of primary necessity. Its production
and conservation must be assured. Farms should be established under peasants having no apparent
connection with the army, if the zone is not secure; they will de-vote themselves to the production
of chickens, eggs, goats, and pigs, starting with stock that has been bought or confiscated from the
large landowners. In the zones of big estates there are usually large quantities of cattle. These can
be killed and salted and the meat maintained in condition for consumption for a long period of time.
This will also produce hides. A leather industry, more or less primitive, can be developed to provide
leather for shoes, one of the fundamental accessories in the struggle. In general, necessary foods are
the following (depending on the zone): meat, salt, vegetables, starches, or grains. The basic food is
always produced by the peasants; it may be "malanga," as in the mountainous regions of Oriente
Province in Cuba; it may be corn, as in the mountainous regions of Mexico, Central America, and

Peru; potatoes, also in Peru; in other zones, such as Argentina, cattle; wheat in others; but always it
is necessary to assure a supply of the fundamental food for the troop as well as some kinds of fat
which permit better food preparation; these may be animal or vegetable fats.
Salt is one of the essential supplies. When the force is near the sea and in contact with it, small
dryers should be established immediately; these will assure some production in order always to
have a reserve stock and the ability to supply the troops. Remember that in wild places such as
these, where only some of the foods are produced, it is easy for the enemy to establish an
encirclement that can greatly hurt the flow of supplies to the zone. It is well to provide against such
eventualities through peasant organization and civil organizations in general. The inhabitants of the
zone should have on hand a minimum food supply that will permit them at least to survive, even
though poorly, during the hardest phases of the struggle. An attempt should be made to collect
rapidly a good provision of foods that do not decompose -such grains, for example, as corn, wheat,
rice, etc., which will last quite a long time; also flour, salt, sugar, and canned goods of all types;
further, the necessary seeds should be sown.
A moment will arrive when all the food problems of the troops in the zone are solved, but large
quantities of other products will be needed: leather for shoes, if it has not been possible to create an
industry for supplying the zone; cloth and all the accessory items necessary for clothing; paper, a
press or mimeograph machine for newspapers, ink, and various other implements. In other words,
the need for articles from the outside world will increase in the measure that the guerrilla bands
become organized and the organization becomes more complex. In order for this need to be met
adequately it is necessary that the organized lines of supply function perfectly. These organizations
are composed basically of friendly peasants. They should have two poles, one in the guerrilla zone
and one in a city. Departing and radiating from the guerrilla zones, lines of supply will penetrate the
whole territory, permitting the passage of materials. Little by little the peasants accustom
themselves to the danger (in small groups they can work marvels) and come to place the material
that is needed in the indicated spot without running extreme risks. These movements can be carried
out at night with mules or other similar transport animals or with trucks, depending on the zone.
Thus, a very good supply may be achieved. This type of line of supply is for areas near places of
operation.
It is also necessary to organize a line of supply from distant areas. These organizations should
produce the money needed for making purchases and also the implements that cannot be produced
in small towns or provincial cities. The organization will be nourished with direct donations from
sectors sympathetic to the struggle, exchanged for secret "bonds," which should be delivered. A
strict control over the personnel charged with the management of this operation should always be
maintained. Serious consequences should follow any neglect of the indispensable moral requisites
involved in this responsibility. Purchases can be made with cash and also with "bonds of hope"
when the guerrilla army, having departed from its base of operations, menaces a new zone. In these
cases there is no way to avoid taking the merchandise from any merchant; he must rely on the good
faith and capabilities of the guerrilla armies to make good on his account.
For all lines of supply that pass through the country, it is necessary to have a series of houses,
terminals, or way-stations, where supplies may be hidden during the day while waiting to be moved
by night. Only those directly in charge of the food supplies should know these houses. The least
possible number of inhabitants should know about this transport operation, and these should be
persons in whom the organization has the greatest confidence.
The mule is one of the most useful animals for these tasks. With an incredible resistance to fatigue
and a capacity to walk in the hilliest zones, the mule can carry more than 100 kilograms on its back
for many days. The simplicity of its food needs also makes it an ideal means of transport. The mule

train should be well supplied with shoes; the muleteers should understand their animals and take the
best possible care of them. In this way it is possible to have regular four-footed armies with an
unbelievable utility. But frequently, despite the strength of the animal and its capacity to bear up
through the hardest days, difficulty of passage will make it necessary to leave the cargo in fixed
sites. In order to avoid this necessity, there should be a team charged with making trails for this
class of animals. If all these conditions are met, if an adequate organization is created, and if the
rebel army maintains excellent relations as needed with the peasants, an effective and lasting supply
for the whole troop is guaranteed.
2. CIVIL ORGANIZATION

The civil organization of the insurrectional movement is very important on both fronts, the external
and the internal. Naturally, these two have characteristics that are as different as their functions,
though they both perform tasks that fall under the same name. The collections that can be carried
out on the external front, for example, are not the same as those which can take place on the internal
front; neither are the propaganda and the supply. Let us describe first the tasks on the internal front.
Here we are dealing with a place dominated, relatively speaking, by the forces of liberation.
Also, it is to be supposed that the zone is adapted to guerrilla warfare, because when these
conditions do not exist, when the guerrilla fighting is taking place in poorly adapted terrain, the
guerrilla organization increases in extension but not in depth; it embraces new places, but it cannot
arrive at an internal organization, since the whole zone is penetrated by the enemy. On the internal
front we can have a series of organizations which perform specific functions for more efficiency in
administration. In general, propaganda belongs directly to the army, but it also can be separated
from the army if kept under its control. (This point is so important that we will treat it separately.)
Collections are a function of the civil organization, as are the general tasks of organizing the
peasants and workers, if these are present. One council should govern both of these classes.
Raising supplies, as we explained in a previous chapter, can be carried out in various ways: through
direct or indirect taxes, through direct or indirect donations, and through confiscations; all this goes
to make up the large chapter on supplies for the guerrilla army.
Keep in mind that the zone ought by no means to be impoverished by the direct action of the rebel
army, even though the latter will be responsible indirectly for the impoverishment that results from
enemy encirclement, a fact that the adversary's propaganda will repeatedly point out. Precisely for
this reason conflicts ought not to be created by direct causes. There ought not be, for example, any
regulations that prevent the farmers of a zone in liberated territory from selling their products
outside that territory, save in extreme and transitory circumstances and with a full explanation of
these interruptions to the peasantry. Every act of the guerrilla army ought always to be accompanied
by the propaganda necessary to explain the reasons for it. These reasons will generally be well
understood by a peasantry that has sons, fathers, brothers, or relations within this army, which is,
therefore, something of their own.
In view of the importance of relations with the peasants, it is necessary to create organizations that
make regulations for them, organizations that exist not only within the liberated area, but also have
connections in the adjacent areas. Precisely through these connections it is possible to penetrate a
zone for a future enlargement of the guerrilla front. The peasants will sow the seed with oral and
written propaganda, with accounts of life in the other zone, of the laws that have already been
issued for the protection of the small peasant, of the spirit of sacrifice of the rebel army; in a word,
they are creating the necessary atmosphere for helping the rebel troops.

The peasant organizations should also have connections of some type that will permit the
channeling and sale of crops by the rebel army agencies in enemy territory through intermediaries
more or less benevolent, more or less friendly to the peasant class. Joined with a devotion to the
cause which brings the merchant to defy dangers in such cases, there also exists the devotion to
money that leads him to take advantage of the opportunity to gain profits.
We have already spoken, in connection with supply problems, of the importance of the department
of road construction. When the guerrilla band has achieved a certain level of development, it no
longer wanders about through diverse regions without an encampment; it has centers that are more
or less fixed. Routes should be established varying from small paths permitting the passage of a
mule to good roads for trucks. In all this, the capacity of the organization of the rebel army must be
kept in mind, as well as the offensive capacity of the enemy, who may destroy these constructions
and even make use of roads built by his opponent to reach the encampments more easily. The
fundamental rule should be that roads are for assisting supply in places where any other solution
would be impossible; they should not be constructed except in circumstances where there is a
virtual certainty that the position can be maintained against an attack by the adversary. Another
exception would be roads built without great risk to facilitate communication between points that
are not of vital importance.
Furthermore, other means of communication may be established. One of these that is extremely
important is the telephone. This can be strung in the forest with the convenience that arises from
using trees for posts. There is the advantage that they are not visible to the enemy from above. The
telephone also presupposes a zone that the enemy cannot penetrate.
The council-or central department of justice, revolutionary laws, and administration-is one of the
vital features of a guerrilla army fully constituted and with territory of its own. The council should
be under the charge of an individual who knows the laws of the country; if he understands the
necessities of the zone from a juridical point of view, this is better yet; he can proceed to prepare a
series of decrees and regulations that help the peasant to normalize and institutionalize his life
within the rebel zone.
For example, during our experience in the Cuban war we issued a penal code, a civil code, rules for
supplying the peasantry and rules of the agrarian reform. Subsequently, the laws fixing
qualifications of candidates in the elections that were to be held later throughout the country were
established; also the Agrarian Reform Law of the Sierra Maestra. The council is likewise in charge
of accounting operations for the guerrilla column or columns; it is responsible for handling money
problems and at times intervenes directly in supply.
All these recommendations are flexible; they are based upon an experience in a certain place and
are conditioned by its geography and history; they will be modified in different geographical,
historical, and social situations. In addition to the council, it is necessary to keep the general health
of the zone in mind. This can be done by means of central military hospitals that should give the
most complete assistance possible to the whole peasantry. Whether adequate medical treatment can
be given will depend upon the stage reached by the revolution. Civil hospitals and civil health
administration are united directly with the guerrilla army, and their functions are performed by
officers and men of the army, who have the dual function of caring for the people and orienting
them toward better health. The big health problems among people in these conditions are rooted in
their total ignorance of elementary principles of hygiene. This aggravates their already precarious
situation.
The collection of taxes, as I have already said, is also a function of the general council. Warehouses

are very important. As soon as a place is taken that is to serve as a base for the guerrilla band,
warehouses should be established in the most orderly fashion possible. These will serve to assure a
minimum care of merchandise and, most important, will provide the control needed for equalizing
distribution and keeping it equitable at later times.
Functions are different on the external front both in quantity and in quality. For example,
propaganda should be of a national, orienting type, explaining the victories obtained by the guerrilla
band, calling workers and peasants to effective mass fights, and giving news, if there is any, of
victories obtained on this front itself. Solicitation of funds is completely secret; it ought to be
carried out with the greatest care possible, isolating small collectors in the chain completely from
the treasurer of the organization.
This organization should be distributed in zones that complement each other in order to form a
totality, zones that may be provinces, states, cities, and villages, depending on the magnitude of the
movement. In each of them there must be a finance commission that takes charge of the disposal of
funds collected. It is possible to collect money by selling bonds or through direct donations. When
the development of the struggle is more advanced, taxes may be collected; when industries come to
recognize the great force that the insurrectional army possesses, they will consent to pay. Supply
procurement should be fitted to the necessities of the guerrilla bands; it will be organized in the
form of a chain of merchandise in such a way that the more common articles are procured in nearby
places, and the things that are really scarce or impossible to procure locally, in larger centers. The
effort always is to keep the chain as limited as possible, known to the smallest number of men; it
can thus perform its mission for a longer time.
Sabotage should be directed by the civil organization in the external sector in coordination with the
central command. In special circumstances, after careful analysis, assaults on persons will be used.
In general we consider that this is not desirable except for the purpose of eliminating some figure
who is notorious for his villainies against the people and the virulence of his repression. Our
experience in the Cuban struggle shows that it would have been possible to save the lives of
numerous fine comrades who were sacrificed in the performance of missions of small value.
Several times these ended with enemy bullets of reprisal on combatants whose loss could not be
compared with the results obtained. Assaults and terrorism in indiscriminate form should not be
employed. More preferable is effort directed at large concentrations of people in whom the
revolutionary idea can be planted and nurtured, so that at a critical moment they can be mobilized
and with the help of the armed forces contribute to a favorable balance on the side of the revolution.
For this it is necessary also to make use of popular organizations of workers, professional people,
and peasants, who work at sowing the seed of the revolution among their respective masses,
explaining, providing revolutionary publications for reading, teaching the truth. One of the
characteristics of revolutionary propaganda must be truth. Little by little, in this way, the masses
will be won over. Those among them who do the best work may be chosen for incorporation into
the rebel army or assignment to other tasks of great responsibility.
This is the outline of civil organization within and outside guerrilla territory at a time of popular
struggle. There are possibilities of perfecting all these features to a high degree. I repeat once more,
it is our Cuban experience which speaks through me; new experiences can vary and improve these
concepts. We offer an outline, not a bible.
3. THE ROLE OF THE WOMAN

The part that the woman can play in the development of a revolutionary process is of extraordinary
importance. It is well to emphasize this, since in all our countries, with their colonial mentality,
there is a certain underestimation of the woman which becomes a real discrimination against her.
The woman is capable of performing the most difficult tasks, of fighting beside the men; and
despite current belief, she does not create conflicts of a sexual type in the troops.
In the rigorous combatant life the woman is a companion who brings the qualities appropriate to her
sex, but she can work the same as a man and she can fight; she is weaker, but no less resistant than
he. She can perform every class of combat task that a man can at a given moment, and on certain
occasions in the Cuban struggle she performed a relief role.
Naturally the combatant women are a minority. When the internal front is being consolidated and it
is desirable to remove as many combatants as possible who do not possess indispensable physical
characteristics, the women can be assigned a considerable number of specific occupations, of which
one of the most important, perhaps the most important, is communication between different
combatant forces, above all between those that are in enemy territory. The transport of objects,
messages, or money, of small size and great importance, should be confided to women in whom the
guerrilla army has absolute confidence; women can transport them using a thousand tricks; it is a
fact that however brutal the repression, however thorough the searching, the woman receives a less
harsh treatment than the man and can carry her message or other object of an important or
confidential character to its destination.
As a simple messenger, either by word of mouth or of writing, the woman can always perform her
task with more freedom than the man, attracting less attention and at the same time inspiring less
fear of danger in the enemy soldier. He who commits brutalities acts frequently under the impulse
of fear or apprehension that he himself will be attacked, since this is one form of action in guerrilla
warfare.
Contacts between separated forces, mess ages to the exterior of the lines, even to the exterior of the
country; also objects of considerable size, such as bullets, are transported by women in special belts
worn beneath their skirts. But also in this stage a woman can perform her habitual tasks of
peacetime; it is very pleasing to a soldier subjected to the extremely hard conditions of this life to be
able to look forward to a seasoned meal which tastes like something. (One of the great tortures of
the war was eating a cold, sticky, tasteless mess.) The woman as cook can greatly improve the diet
and, furthermore, it is easier to keep her in these domestic tasks; one of the problems in guerrilla
bands is that all works of a civilian character are scorned by those who perform them; they are
constantly trying to get out of these tasks in order to enter into forces that are actively in combat.
A task of great importance for women is to teach beginning reading, including revolutionary theory,
primarily to the peasants of the zone, but also to the revolutionary soldiers. The organization of
schools, which is a part of the civil organization, should be done principally through women, who
arouse more enthusiasm among children and enjoy more affection from the school community.
Likewise, when the fronts have been consolidated and a rear exists, the functions of the social
worker also fall to women who investigate the various economic and social evils of the zone with a
view to changing them as far as possible.
The woman plays an important part in medical matters as nurse, and even as doctor, with a
gentleness infinitely superior to that of her rude companion in arms, a gentleness that is so much
appreciated at moments when a man is helpless, without comforts, perhaps suffering severe pain
and exposed to the many dangers of all classes that are a part of this type of war.

Once the stage of creating small war industries has begun, the woman can also contribute here,
especially in the manufacture of uniforms, a traditional employment of women in Latin American
countries. With a simple sewing machine and a few patterns she can perform marvels. Women can
take part in all lines of civil organization. They can replace men perfectly well and ought to do so,
even where persons are needed for carrying weapons, though this is a rare accident in guerrilla life.
It is important to give adequate indoctrination to men and women, in order to avoid all kinds of
misbehavior that can operate to hurt the morale of the troops; but persons who are otherwise free
and who love each other should be permitted to marry in the Sierra and live as man and wife after
complying with the simple requirements of the guerrilla band.
4. MEDICAL PROBLEMS

One of the grave problems that confronts the guerrilla fighter is exposure to the accidents of his life,
especially to wounds and sicknesses, which are very frequent in guerrilla warfare. The doctor
performs a function of extraordinary importance in the guerrilla band, not only in saving lives, in
which many times his scientific intervention does not count because of the limited resources
available to him; but also in the task of reinforcing the patient morally and making him feel that
there is a person near him who is dedicated with all his force to minimizing his pains. He gives the
wounded or sick the security of knowing that a person will remain at his side until he is cured or has
passed danger.
The organization of hospitals depends largely upon the stage of development of the guerrilla band.
Three fundamental types of hospital organization corresponding to various stages can be mentioned.
In this development we have a first, nomadic phase. In it the doctor, if there is one, travels
constantly with his companions, is just another man; he will probably have to perform all the other
functions of the guerrilla fighter, including that of fighting, and will suffer at times the depressing
and desperate task of treating cases in which the means of saving life are not available. This is the
stage in which the doctor has the most influence over the troops, the greatest importance for their
morale. During this period in the development of the guerrilla band the doctor achieves to the full
his character of a true priest who seems to carry in his scantily equipped knapsack needed
consolation for the men. The value of a simple aspirin to one who is suffering is beyond calculation
when it is given by the friendly hand of one who sympathetically makes the suffering his own.
Therefore the doctor in the first stage should be a man who is totally identified with the ideals of the
revolution, because his words will affect the troops much more deeply than those spoken by any
other member.
In the normal course of events in guerrilla warfare another stage is reached that could be called
"semi- nomadic." In it there are encampments, more or less frequented by the guerrilla troops;
friendly houses of complete confidence where it is possible to store objects and even leave the
wounded; and a growing tendency for the troop to become settled. At this stage the task of the
doctor is less trying; he may have emergency surgical equipment in his knapsack and another more
complete outfit for less urgent operations in a friendly house. It is possible to leave the sick and
wounded in the care of peasants who will give their help with great devotion. He can also count on
a larger number of medicines kept in convenient places; these should be completely catalogued as
well as possible, considering the circumstances in which he lives. In this same semi-nomadic state,
if the band operates in places that are absolutely inaccessible, hospitals can be established to which

the sick and wounded will go for recovery.
In the third stage, when there are zones invulnerable to the enemy, a true hospital organization is
constructed. In its most developed form, it can consist of three centers of different types. In the
combat category there ought to be a doctor, the combatant the most loved by the troop, the man of
battle, whose knowledge does not have to be too deep. I say this because his task is principally one
of giving relief and of preparing the sick or wounded, while the real medical work is performed in
hospitals more securely situated. A surgeon of quality ought not to be sacrificed in the line of fire.
When a man falls in the front line, stretcher-bearers, if these are available given the organization of
the guerrilla band, will carry him to the first post; if they are not available, his companions
themselves will perform this duty. Transport of the wounded in rough zones is one of the most
delicate of all tasks and one of the most painful experiences in a soldier's life. Perhaps the transport
of a wounded man is harder on all concerned, because of his sufferings and of the spirit of sacrifice
in the troop, than the fact itself of being wounded, however grave it may be. The transport can be
carried out in different ways according to the characteristics of the ground. In rough and wooded
places, which are typical in guerrilla warfare, it is necessary to walk single file. Here the best
system is to use a long pole, with the patient carried in a hammock that hangs from it.
The men take turns carrying the weight, one before and one behind. They should yield place to two
other companions frequently, since the shoulders suffer severely and the individual gradually wears
himself out carrying this delicate and heavy burden.
When the wounded soldier has passed through this first hospital, he then goes with the information
as to what has been done for him to a second center, where there are surgeons and specialists
depending upon the possibilities of the troop. Here the more serious operations needed for saving
life or relieving individuals from danger are performed.
Afterwards, at a third level, hospitals with the greatest comforts possible are established for direct
investigation in the zones affected of the causes and effects of illnesses that afflict the inhabitants of
the area. These hospitals of the third group, which correspond to a sedentary life, are not only
centers of convalescence and of operations of less urgency, but also establishments serving the civil
population, where the hygienists perform their orienting function. Dispensaries that will permit an
adequate individual surveillance should also be established. The hospitals of this third group can
have, if the supply capability of the civil organization permits, a series of facilities that provide
diagnosis even with laboratory and x-ray facilities.
Other useful individuals are the assistants to the doctor. They are generally youths with something
of a vocation and some knowledge, with fairly strong physiques; they do not bear arms, sometimes
because their vocation is medicine, but usually because there are insufficient arms for all who want
them. These assistants will be in charge of carrying most of the medicines, an extra stretcher or
hammock, if circumstances make this possible. They must take charge of the wounded in any battle
that is fought.
The necessary medicines should be obtained through contacts with health organizations that exist in
territory of the enemy. Sometimes they can be obtained from such organizations as the International
Red Cross, but this possibility should not be counted upon, especially in the first moments of the
struggle. It is necessary to organize an apparatus that will permit rapid transport of needed
medicines in case of danger and that will gradually supply all the hospitals with the supplies needed
for their work, military as well as civil. Also, contacts should be made in the surrounding areas with
doctors who will be capable of helping the wounded whose cases are beyond the capacities or the
facilities of the guerrilla band.

Doctors needed for this type of warfare are of different characteristics. The combatant doctor, the
companion of men, is the type for the first stage; his functions develop as the action of the guerrilla
band becomes more complicated and a series of connected organisms are constructed. General
surgeons are the best acquisition for an army of this type. If an anesthetist is available, so much the
better; though almost all operations are performed, not with gas anesthesia, but using "largactil" and
sodium pentothal, which are much easier to administer and easier to procure and conserve. Besides
general surgeons, bone specialists are very useful, because fractures occur frequently from accidents
in the zone; bullets producing this type of wound in limbs also frequently cause them. The clinic
serves the peasant mass mainly, since in general, sicknesses in the guerrilla armies are so easy of
diagnosis as to be within the reach of anybody. The most difficult task is the cure of those produced
by nutritional deficiencies.
In a more advanced stage there may even be laboratory technicians, if there are good hospitals, in
order to have a complete outfit. Calls should be made to all sectors of the profession whose services
are needed; it is quite likely that many will respond to this call and come to lend their help.
Professionals of all classes are needed; surgeons are very useful, dentists as well. Dentists should be
advised to come with a simple campaign apparatus and a campaign-type drill; working with this
they can do practically everything necessary.
5. SABOTAGE

Sabotage is one of the invaluable arms of a people that fights in guerrilla form. Its organization falls
under the civil or clandestine branch, since sabotage should be carried out, of course, only outside
the territories dominated by the revolutionary army; but this organization should be directly
commanded and oriented by the general staff of the guerrillas, which will be responsible for
deciding the industries, communications, or other objectives that are to be attacked.
Sabotage has nothing to do with terrorism; terrorism and personal assaults are entirely different
tactics. We sincerely believe that terrorism is of negative value, that it by no means produces the
desired effects, that it can turn a people against a revolutionary movement, and that it can bring a
loss of lives to its agents out of proportion to what it produces. On the other hand, attempts to take
the lives of particular persons are to be made, though only in very special circumstances; this tactic
should be used where it will eliminate a leader of the oppression. What ought never to be done is to
employ specially trained, heroic, self-sacrificing human beings in eliminating a little assassin whose
death can provoke the destruction in reprisal of all the revolutionaries employed and even more.
Sabotage should be of two types: sabotage on a national scale against determined objectives, and
local sabotage against lines of combat. Sabotage on a national scale should be aimed principally at
destroying communications. Each type of communication can be destroyed in a different way; all of
them are vulnerable. For example, telegraph and telephone poles are easily destroyed by sawing
them almost all the way through, so that at night they appear to be in normal condition; a sudden
kick causes one pole to fall and this drags along with it all those that are weak, producing a blackout
of considerable extent.
Bridges can be attacked with dynamite; if there is no dynamite, those made of steel can be made to
fall very easily with an oxyacetylene blowtorch. A steel truss bridge should be cut in its main beam
and in the upper beam from which the bridge hangs. When these two beams have been cut at one
end with the torch, they are then cut at the opposite end. The bridge will fall completely on one side
and will be twisted and destroyed. This is the most effective way to knock out a steel bridge without

dynamite. Railroads should also be destroyed, as should roads and culverts; at times trains should
be blown up, if the power of the guerrilla band makes this possible.
Utilizing the necessary equipment will also destroy the vital industries of each region at certain
moments. In these cases it is necessary to have an overall view of the problem and to be sure that a
center of work is not destroyed unless the moment is decisive, since this brings with it as a
consequence massive unemployment of workers and hunger. The enterprises belonging to the
potentates of the regime should be eliminated (and attempts made to convince the workers of the
need for doing so), unless this will bring very grave social consequences.
We reiterate the importance of sabotage against communications. The great strength of the enemy
army against the rebels in the flatter zones is rapid communication; we must, then, constantly
undermine that strength by knocking out railroad bridges, culverts, electric lights, telephones; also
aqueducts and in general everything that is necessary for a normal and modern life.
Around the combat lines sabotage should be performed in the same way but with much more
audacity, with much more dedication and frequency. Here it is possible to count on the invaluable
aid of the flying patrols of the guerrilla army, which can descend into these zones and help the
members of the civil organization perform a given task. Again, sabotage ought to be aimed
principally at communications, but with much more persistence. All factories, all centers of
production that are capable of giving the enemy something needed to maintain his offensive against
the popular forces, ought also to be liquidated.
Emphasis should be placed on seizing merchandise, cutting supplies as much as possible, if
necessary frightening the large landowners who want to sell their farm products, burning vehicles
that travel along the roads, and using them to blockade the roads. It is expedient in every action of
sabotage that frequent contact be made with the enemy army at points not far away, always
following the system of hit and run. It is not necessary to put up a serious resistance, but simply to
show the adversary that in the area where the sabotage has been carried out there are guerrilla forces
disposed to fight. This forces him to take a large number of troops, to go with care, or not to go at
all.
Thus, little by little, all the cities in the zone surrounding guerrilla operations will be paralyzed.
6. WAR INDUSTRY

Industries of war within the sector of the guerrilla army must be the product of a rather long
evolution; they also depend upon control of territory in a geographic situation favorable for the
guerrilla. At a time when there are liberated zones and when the enemy establishes strict blockades
over all supplies, different departments will be organized as necessary, in the manner already
described. There are two fundamental industries, of which one is the manufacture of shoes and
leather goods. It is not possible for a troop to walk without shoes in wooded zones, hilly, with many
rocks and thorns. It is very difficult to march without shoes in such conditions; only the natives, and
not all of them, can do it. The rest must have shoes. The industry is divided into two parts, one for
putting on half-soles and repairing damaged shoes; the other will be devoted to the manufacture of
rough shoes. There should be a small but complete apparatus for making shoes; since this is a
simple industry practiced by many people in such regions it is very easy to procure. Connected with
the shoe repair works there ought always to be a shop making all classes of canvas and leather
goods for use by the troop, such as cartridge belts and knapsacks. Although these articles are not
vital, they contribute to comfort and give a feeling of autonomy, of adequate supply, and of self-

reliance to the troop.
An armory is the other fundamental industry for the small internal organization of the guerrilla
band. This also has different functions: that of simple repair of damaged weapons, of rifles, and
other available arms; the function of manufacturing certain types of combat arms that the
inventiveness of the people will create; and the preparation of mines with various mechanisms.
When conditions permit, equipment for the manufacture of powder may be added. If it is possible to
manufacture the explosive as well as the percussion mechanisms in free territory, brilliant
achievements can be scored in this category, which is a very important one, because
communications by road can be completely paralyzed by the adequate employment of mines.
Another group of industries that has its importance will make iron and tin products. In the iron
works will be centered all labor connected with the equipping of the mules, such as making their
shoes. In the tin works the fabrication of plates and especially of canteens is important. A foundry
can be joined with the tin works. By melting soft metals it is possible to make grenades, which with
a special type of charge will contribute in an important way to the armament of the troop. There
ought to be a technical team for general repair and construction work of varied types, the "service
battery," as it is called in regular armies. With the guerrillas it would operate as such, taking care of
all necessities, but without any vestige of the bureaucratic spirit.
Someone must be in charge of communications. He will have as his responsibility not only
propaganda communications, such as radio directed toward the outside, but also telephones and
roads of all types. We will use the civil organization as necessary in order to perform his duties
effectively. Remember that we are in a period of war subject to attack by the military and that often
many lives depend upon timely communication.
For accommodating the troop it is well to have cigarette and cigar factories. The leaf can be bought
in selected places and carried to free territory where the articles for consumption by the soldiers can
be manufactured. An industry for preparing leather from hides is also of great importance. All these
are simple enterprises that can operate quite well anywhere and are easy to establish in the guerrilla
situation. The industry for making leather requires some small construction with cement; also it
uses large amounts of salt; but it will be an enormous advantage to the shoe industry to have its own
supply of raw material. Salt should be made in revolutionary territory and accumulated in large
quantities. It is made by evaporating water of a high saline concentration. The sea is the best source,
though there may be others. It is not necessary to purify it of other ingredients for purposes of
consumption, though these give it a flavor that is disagreeable at first.
Meat should be conserved in the form of jerked beef, which is easy to prepare. This can save many
lives among the troop in extreme situations. It can be conserved with salt in large barrels for a fairly
long time, and it can then be eaten in any circumstances.
7. PROPAGANDA

The revolutionary idea should be diffused by means of appropriate media to the greatest depth
possible. This requires complete equipment and an organization. This organization should be of two
types which complement each other in covering the whole national area: for propaganda originating
outside free territory, that is, from the national civil organization; and propaganda originating
within, that is, from the base of the guerrilla army. In order to coordinate these two propagandas,
the functions of which are strictly related, there should be a single director for the whole effort.

Propaganda of the national type from civil organizations outside free territory should be distributed
in newspapers, bulletins, and proclamations. The most important newspapers will be devoted to
general matters in the country and will inform the public exactly of the state of the guerrilla forces,
observing always the fundamental principle that truth in the long run is the best policy. Besides
these publications of general interest there must be others more specialized for different sectors of
the population. A publication for the countryside should bring to the peasant class a message from
their companions in all the free zones who have already felt the beneficial effects of the revolution;
this strengthens the aspirations of the peasantry. A workers' newspaper will have similar
characteristics, with the sole difference that it cannot always offer a message from the combatant
part of that class, since it is likely that workers' organizations will not operate within the framework
of guerrilla warfare until the last stages.
The great watchwords of the revolutionary movement, the watchword of a general strike at an
opportune moment, of help to the rebel forces, of unity, etc., should be explained. Other periodicals
can be published; for example, one explaining the tasks of those elements in the whole island which
are not combatants but which nevertheless carry out diverse acts of sabotage, of attempts, etc.
Within the organization there can be periodicals aimed at the enemy's soldiers; these will explain
facts of which they are otherwise kept ignorant. News bulletins and proclamations about the
movement are very useful.
The most effective propaganda is that which is prepared within the guerrilla zone. Priority will be
given to the diffusion of ideas among natives of the zone, offering explanations of the theoretical
significance of the insurrection, already known to them as a fact. In this zone there will also be
peasant periodicals, the general organ of all the guerrilla forces, and bulletins and proclamations.
There will also be the radio.
All problems should be discussed by radio-for example, the way to defend oneself from air attacks
and location of the enemy forces, citing familiar names among them. Propaganda for the whole
nation will use newspapers of the same type as those prepared outside free territory, but it can
produce fresher and more exact news, reporting facts and battles that are extremely interesting to
the reader. Information on international affairs will be confined almost exclusively to commentary
on facts that are directly related to the struggle of liberation.
The propaganda that will be the most effective in spite of everything, that which will spread most
freely over the whole national area to reach the reason and the sentiments of the people, is words
over the radio. The radio is a factor of extraordinary importance. At moments when war fever is
more or less palpitating in every one in a region or a country, the inspiring, burning word increases
this fever and communicates it to every one of the future combatants. It explains, teaches, fires, and
fixes the future positions of both friends and enemies. However, the radio should be ruled by the
fundamental principle of popular propaganda, which is truth; it is preferable to tell the truth, small
in its dimensions, than a large lie artfully embellished. On the radio news should be given,
especially of battles, of encounters of all types, and assassinations committed by the repression;
also, doctrinal orientations and practical lessons to the civil population; and, from time to time,
speeches by the chiefs of the revolution. We consider it useful that the principal newspaper of the
movement bear a name that recalls something great and unifying, perhaps a national hero or
something similar. Also, it should explain in articles of depth where the armed movement is going.
It ought to create a consciousness of the great national problems, besides offering sections of more
lively interest for the reader.
8. INTELLIGENCE
"Know yourself and your adversary and you will be able to fight a hundred battles without a single

disaster." This Chinese aphorism is as valuable for guerrilla warfare as a biblical psalm. Nothing
gives more help to combatant forces than correct information. This arrives spontaneously from the
local inhabitants, who will come to tell its friendly army, its allies, what is happening in various
places; but in addition it should be completely systematized. As we saw, there should be a postal
organization with necessary contacts both within and outside guerrilla zones for carrying messages
and merchandise. An intelligence service also should be in direct contact with enemy fronts. Men
and women, especially women, should infiltrate; they should be in permanent contact with soldiers
and gradually discover what there is to be discovered. The system must be coordinated in such a
way that crossing the enemy lines into the guerrilla camp can be carried out without mishap.
If this is well done with competent agents the insurgent camp will be able to sleep more quietly.
This intelligence will be concerned principally, as I have already said, with the front line of fire or
the forward enemy encampments that are in contact with no man's land; but it ought also to develop
in the same measure as the guerrilla band develops, increasing its depth of operation and its
potential to foresee larger troop movements in the enemy rear. Though all inhabitants are
intelligence agents for the guerrilla band in the places where it is dominant or makes incursions, it is
wise to have persons especially assigned to this duty. The peasants, not accustomed to precise battle
language, have a strong tendency to exaggerate, so their reports must be checked. As the
spontaneous forms of popular collaboration are molded and organized, it is possible to use the
intelligence apparatus not only as an extremely important auxiliary but also as a weapon of attack
by using its personnel, for example, as "sowers of fear." Pretending to be on the side of the enemy
soldiers, they sow fear and instability by spreading discouraging information. By knowing exactly
the places where the enemy troop is going to attack, it is easy to avoid him or, when the time is ripe,
to attack him at places where it is least expected. Mobility, the basic tactic, can be developed to the
maximum.
9. TRAINING AND INDOCTRINATION

The fundamental training of the soldier of liberation is the life itself with the guerrilla band, and no
one can be a chief who has not learned his difficult office in daily, armed exercises. Life with some
companions will teach something about the handling of arms, about principles of orientation, about
the manner of treating the civil population, about fighting, etc.; but the precious time of the guerrilla
band is not to be consumed in methodical teaching. This begins only when there is a large liberated
area and a large number of persons are needed for carrying out a combat function. Schools for
recruits will then be established. These schools then perform a very important function. They are to
form new soldiers from persons who have not passed through that excellent sieve of formidable
privations, guerrilla combatant life. Other privations must be suffered at the outset to convert them
into the truly chosen. After having passed through very difficult tests, they will arrive at
incorporating themselves into the kingdom of an army that lives from day to day and leaves no
traces of its path anywhere. They ought to perform physical exercises, mainly of two types: an agile
gymnastic with training for war of a commando type, which demands agility in attack and
withdrawal; and hikes that are hard and exhausting that will serve to toughen the recruit for this
kind of existence. Above all, they should live in the open air. They should suffer all the
inclemencies of the weather in close contact with nature, as the guerrilla band does.
The school for recruits must have workers who will take care of its supply needs. For this there
should be cattle sheds, grain sheds, gardens, dairy, everything necessary, so that the school will not
constitute a charge on the general budget of the guerrilla army. The students can serve in rotation in
the work of sup- ply, either as punishment for bad conduct or simply as volunteers. This will

depend upon characteristics proper to the zone where the school is being held. We believe that a
good principle is to assign volunteers and to cover the remaining work quotas with those who have
the poorest conduct and show the poorest disposition for learning warfare.
The school should have its small medical organization with a doctor or nurse, according to the p05sibilities; this will provide the recruits with the best possible attention.
Shooting is the basic apprenticeship (See Picture 3-1). The guerrilla fighter should be carefully
trained in this respect, so that he will try to expend the least possible amount of ammunition. He
begins by practicing what is called dry shooting. It consists of seating the rifle firmly on any kind of
wooden apparatus as shown in the picture. Without moving or firing the rifle the recruits direct the
movement of a target until they think they have a hole at the center exactly in the line of sight. A
mark is made on a backboard that remains stationary. If the mark for three tries gives a single point,
this is excellent. When circumstances permit, practice with 22-calibre rifles will begin; this is very
useful. If there is an excess of ammunition or a great need for preparing soldiers, opportunity will
be given to fire with bullets.
One of the most important courses in the school for recruits, one which we hold to be basic and
which can be given in any place in the world, is in meeting attack from the air Our school had been
positively identified from the air and received attacks once or twice daily. The form in which the
students resisted the impact of these continuous bombardments on their regular places of instruction
virtually showed which of the young men had possibilities for becoming useful soldiers in battle.
The important thing, that which must never be neglected in a school for recruits, is indoctrination;
this is important because the men arrive without a clear conception as to why they come, with
nothing more than very diffuse concepts about liberty, freedom of the press, etc., without any clear
foundation whatever. Therefore, the indoctrination should be carried out with maximum dedication
and for the maximum amount of time possible. These courses should offer elementary notions about
the history of the country, explained with a clear sense of the economic facts that motivate each of
the historic acts; accounts of the national heroes and their manner of reacting when confronted with
certain injustices; and afterwards an analysis of the national situation or of the situation in the zone.
A short primer should be well studied by all members of the rebel army, so that it can serve as a
skeleton of that which will come later.
There should also be a school for training teachers, where agreement can be reached on the choice
of texts to be used, taking as a basis the contribution that each book can make to the educational
process.
Reading should be encouraged at all times, with an effort to promote books that are worthwhile and
that enlarge the recruit's facility to encounter the world of letters and great national problems.
Further reading will follow as a vocation; the surrounding circumstances will awaken new desires
for understanding in the soldiers. This result will be produced when, little by little, the recruits
observe in their routine tasks the enormous advantages of men who have passed through the school
over the remainder of the troop, their capacity for analyzing problems, their superior discipline,
which is another of the fundamental things that the school should teach.
This discipline should be internal, not mechanical but justified by reasons and designed to produce
formidable benefits in moments of combat.

10. THE ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE ARMY OF A REVOLUTIONARY
MOVEMENT

As we have seen, a revolutionary army of a guerrilla type, whatever its zone of operations, should
also have a non-combatant organization for the performance of a series of extremely important
auxiliary missions. We shall see later that this whole organization converges to lend the army
maximum help, since obviously the armed fight is the crucial factor in the triumph.
The military organization is headed by a commander-in-chief, in the case of the Cuban experience
by a commandant, who names the commanders of the different regions or zones; these latter have
authority to govern their respective territories of action, to name column commanders, that is to say,
the chiefs of each column, and the other lower officers.
Under the commander-in-chief there will be the zone commanders; under them several columns of
varying size, each with a column commander; under the column commanders there will be captains
and lieutenants, which, in our guerrilla organization, were the lowest grade. In other words, the first
rank above the soldiers was the lieutenant.
This is not a model but a description of one reality, of how the organization worked in one country
where it proved possible to achieve triumph over an army that was fairly well organized and armed.
Even less here than in other respects is our experience a pattern. It simply shows how as events
develop it is possible to organize an armed force. The ranks certainly have no importance, but it is
important that no rank should be conferred that does not correspond to the effective battle force
commanded. Ranks should not be given to persons who have not passed through the sieve of
sacrifice and struggle, for that would conflict with morality and justice.
The description given above refers to a well-developed army, already capable of waging a serious
combat. In the first stage of the guerrilla band, the chief can take the rank he likes, but he will still
command only a small group of men.
One of the most important features of military organization is disciplinary punishment. Discipline
must be one of the bases of action of the guerrilla forces (this must be repeated again and again). As
we have already said, it should spring from a carefully reasoned internal conviction; this produces
an individual with inner discipline. When this discipline is violated, it is necessary always to punish
the offender, whatever his rank, and to punish him drastically in a way that hurts.
This is important, because pain is not felt by a guerrilla soldier in the same way as by a soldier of
the regular army. The punishment of putting a soldier in jail for ten days constitutes for the guerrilla
fighter a magnificent period of rest; ten days with nothing to do but eat, no marching, no work, no
standing the customary guards, sleeping at will, resting, reading, etc. From this it can be deduced
that deprivation of liberty ought not to be the only punishment available in the guerrilla situation.
When the combat morale of the individual is very high and self-respect strong, deprivation of his
right to be armed can constitute a true punishment for the individual and provoke a positive
reaction. In such cases, this is an expedient punishment. The following painful incident is an
example. During the battle for one of the cities of Las Villas province in the final days of the war,
we found an individual asleep in a chair while others were attacking positions in the middle of the
town. When questioned, the man responded that he was sleeping because he had been deprived of
his weapon for firing accidentally. He was told that this was not the way to react to punishment and
that he should regain his weapon, not in this way, but in the first line of combat.

A few days passed, and as the final assault on the city of Santa Clara began, we visited the first-aid
hospital. A dying man there extended his hand, recalling the episode I have narrated, affirmed that
he had been capable of recovering his weapon and had earned the right to carry it. Shortly
afterwards, he died.
This was the grade of revolutionary morale that our troop achieved through the continual exercise
of armed struggle. It is not possible to achieve it at the outset, when there are still many who are
frightened, and subjective currents serve to put a brake on the influence of the Revolution; but
finally it is reached through work and through the force of continual example.
Long night watches and forced marches can also serve as punishments; but the marches are not
really practical, since they consume the individual to no purpose other than that of punishment, and
they require guards who also wear themselves out. The guards suffer the further inconvenience of
having to keep a watch on the persons being punished, who are soldiers of scant revolutionary
mentality.
In the forces directly under my command I imposed the punishment of arrest with privation of
sweets and cigarettes for light offenses and a total deprivation of food for worse offenses. The result
was magnificent, even though the punishment was terrible; it is advisable only in very special
circumstances.

APPENDICES
1. ORGANIZATION IN SECRET OF THE FIRST GUERRILLA BAND

Guerrilla warfare obeys laws, some derived from the general laws of war and others owing to its
own special character. If there is a real intention to begin the struggle from some foreign cou9try or
from distant and remote regions within the same country, it is obvious that it must begin in small
conspiratorial movements of secret members acting without mass support or knowledge. If the
guerrilla movement is born spontaneously out of the reaction of a group of individuals to some form
of coercion, it is possible that the later organization of this guerrilla nucleus to prevent its
annihilation will be sufficient for a beginning. But generally guerrilla warfare starts from a wellconsidered act of will: some chief with prestige starts an uprising for the salvation of his people,
beginning his work in difficult conditions in a foreign country.
Almost all the popular movements undertaken against dictators in recent times have suffered from
the same fundamental fault of inadequate preparation. The rules of conspiracy, which demand
extreme secrecy and caution, have not generally been observed. The governmental power of the
country frequently knows in advance about the intentions of the group or groups, either through its
secret service or from imprudent revelations or in some cases from outright declarations, as
occurred, for example, in our case, in which the invasion was announced and summed up in the
phrase of Fidel Castro. "In the year '56 we will be free or we will be martyrs."
Absolute secrecy, a total absence of information in the enemy's hands, should be the primary base
of the movement. Secondly and also very important is selection of the human material. At times this
selection can be carried out easily, but at others it will be extremely difficult, since it is necessary to

rely on those elements that are available, longtime exiles or persons who present themselves when
the call goes out simply because they understand that it is their duty to enroll in the battle to liberate
their country, etc. There may not be the necessary facilities for making a complete investigation of
these individuals. Nevertheless, even though elements of the enemy regime introduce themselves, it
is unpardonable that they should later be able to pass information, because in the period just prior to
an action all those who are going to participate should be concentrated in secret places known only
to one or two persons; they should be under the strict vigilance of their chiefs and without the
slightest contact with the outside world. Whenever there are concentrations, whether as a
preparation for departure or in order to carry out preliminary training or simply to hide from the
police, it is necessary always to keep all new personnel about whom there is no clear knowledge
available away from the key places.
In underground conditions no one, absolutely no one, should know anything more than the strictly
indispensable; and there ought not to be talk in front of anyone. When certain types of concentration
have been carried out, it is necessary even to control letters that leave and arrive in order to have a
total knowledge of the contacts that the individuals maintain; no one should be permitted to live
alone, nor to go out alone; personal contacts of the future member of the liberating army, contacts
of any type, should be prevented by every means. However positive the role of women in the
struggle, it must be emphasized that they can also play a destructive part. The weakness for women
that young men have when living apart from their habitual medium of life in special, even psychic
conditions, is well known. As dictators are well aware of this weakness, they try to use it for
infiltrating their spies. At times the relationship of these women with their superiors is clear and
even notorious; at other times, it is extremely difficult to discover even the slightest evidence of
contact; therefore, it is necessary also to prohibit relations with women.
The revolutionary in a clandestine situation preparing for war should be a complete ascetic; this also
serves to test one of the qualities that later will be the basis of his authority, discipline. If an
individual repeatedly disobeys orders of his superiors and makes contacts with women, contracts
friendships that arc not permitted, etc., he should be separated immediately, not merely because of
the potential dangers in the contacts, but simply because of the violation of revolutionary discipline.
Unconditional help should not be expected from a government, whether friendly or simply
negligent, that allows its territory to be used as a base of operations; one should regard the situation
as if he were in a completely hostile camp. The few exceptions that of course can occur are really
confirmations of the general rule.
We shall not speak here of the number of persons that should be readied. This depends upon so
many and such varied conditions that it is practically impossible to specify. But the minimum
number with which it is possible to initiate a guerrilla war can be mentioned. In my opinion,
considering the normal desertions and weaknesses in spite of the rigorous process of selection, there
should be a nucleus of 30 to 50 men; this figure is sufficient to initiate an armed fight in any
country of the Americas with their conditions of favorable territory for operations, hunger for land,
repeated attacks upon justice, etc.
Weapons, as has already been said, should be of the same type as those used by the enemy.
Considering always that every government is in principle hostile to a guerrilla action being
undertaken from its territory, the bands that prepare themselves should not be greater than
approximately 50 to 100 men per unit. In other words, though there is no objection to 500 men
initiating a war, all 500 should not be concentrated in one place. They are so numerous as to attract
attention and in case of any betrayal of confidence or of any raid, the whole group falls; on the other
hand, it is more difficult to raid various places simultaneously.

The central headquarters for meetings can be more or less known, and the exiled persons will go
there to hold meetings of all types; but the leaders ought not to be present except very sporadically,
and there should be no compromising documents. The leaders should use as many different houses
as possible, those least likely to be under surveillance. Arms deposits should be distributed in
several places, if possible; these should be an absolute secret, known to only one or two people.
Weapons should be delivered into the hands of those who are going to use them only when the war
is about to be initiated. Thus a punitive action against persons who are training, while leading to
their imprisonment, will not produce a loss of arms that are very difficult to procure. Popular forces
are not in any condition to suffer such a loss.
Another important factor to which due attention must be given is preparation of the forces for the
extremely hard fight that is going to follow. These forces should have a strict discipline, a high
morale, and a clear comprehension of the task to be performed, without conceit, without illusions,
without false hopes of an easy triumph. The struggle will be bitter and long, reverses will be
suffered; they can be at the brink of annihilation; only high morale, discipline, faith in final victory,
and exceptional leadership can save them. This was our Cuban experience; at one time twelve men
were able to form the nucleus of the future army, because all these conditions were met and because
the one who led us was named Fidel Castro.
Besides ideological and moral preparations, careful physical training is necessary. The guerrillas
will, of course, select a mountainous or very wild zone for their operations. At any rate, in whatever
situation they find themselves, the basic tactic of the guerrilla army is the march, and neither slow
men nor tired men can be tolerated. Adequate training therefore includes exhausting hikes day and
night, day after day, increasing gradually, always continued to the brink of exhaustion, with
emulation used to increase speed. Resistance and speed will be fundamental qualities of the first
guerrilla nucleus. Also a series of theoretical principles can be taught, for example, direction
finding, reading, and forms of sabotage. If possible, there should be training with military rifles,
frequent firing, above all at distant targets, and much instruction about the way to economize
bullets.
To the guerrilla fighter, economy and utilization of ammunition down to the last bullet should be almost like religious tenets. If all these admonitions are followed, the guerrilla forces may well reach
their goal.
2. DEFENSE OF POWER THAT HAS BEEN WON

Naturally victory cannot be considered as finally won until the army that sustained the former
regime has been systematically and totally smashed. Further, all the institutions that sheltered the
former regime should be wiped out. But since this is a manual for guerrilla bands we will confine
ourselves to analyzing the problem of national defense in case of war or aggression against the new
power.
The first development we meet is that world public opinion, "the respectable press," the "truthful"
news agencies of the United States and of the other countries belonging to the monopolies will
begin an attack on the liberated country, an attack as aggressive and systematic as the laws of
popular reform. For this reason not even a skeleton of personnel from the for-former army can be
retained. Militarism, mechanical obedience, traditional concepts of military duty, discipline and
morale cannot be eradicated with one blow. Nor can the victors, who are good fighters, decent and

kindhearted, but at the same time generally lacking education, be allowed to remain in contact with
the vanquished, who are proud of their specialized military knowledge in some combat arm- in
mathematics, fortifications, logistics, etc.-and who hate the uncultured guerrilla fighters with all
their might.
There are, of course, individual cases of military men who break with the past and enter into the
new organization with a spirit of complete cooperation. These persons are doubly useful, because
they unite with their love of the people's cause the knowledge necessary for carrying forward the
creation of the new popular army A second step will be consequent upon the first: as the old army is
smashed and dismembered as an institution and its former posts occupied by the new army, it will
be necessary to reorganize the new force. Its former guerrilla character, operating under
independent chiefs without planning, can be changed; but it is very important to emphasize that
operational concepts of the guerrilla band should still serve as the guide to structure. These concepts
will determine the organic formation and the equipment of the popular army. Care should be taken
to avoid the error that we fell into during the first months of trying to put the new popular army into
the old bottles of military discipline and ancient organization. This error can cause serious
maladjustments and can lead to a complete lack of organization.
Preparation should begin immediately for the new defensive war that will have to be fought by the
people's army, accustomed to independence of command within the common struggle and
dynamism in the management of each armed group. This army will have two immediate problems.
One will be the in- corporation of thousands of last-hour revolutionaries, good and bad, whom it is
necessary to train for the rigors of guerrilla life and to give revolutionary indoctrination in
accelerated and intensive courses. Revolutionary indoctrination that gives the necessary ideological
unity to the army of the people is the basis of national security both in the long and short runs. The
other problem is the difficulty of adaptation to the new organizational structure.
A corps to take charge of sowing the new truths of the Revolution among all the units of the army
should immediately be created. It should explain to the soldiers, peasants, and workers, who have
come out of the mass of the people, the justice and the truth of each revolutionary act, the
aspirations of the Revolution, why there is a fight, why so many companions have died without
seeing the victory. United to this intensive indoctrination, accelerated courses of primary instruction
that will begin to overcome illiteracy should also be given, in order to improve the rebel army
gradually until it has become an instrument of high technical qualifications, solid ideological
structure, and magnificent combat power.
Time will create these three qualities. The military apparatus can continue to be perfected as time
goes on; the former combatants can be given special courses to prepare them to serve as
professional military men who will then give annual courses of instruction to the people joining
voluntarily or by conscription. This will depend on national characteristics and rules cannot be
stated.
From this point forward we are expressing the opinion of the command of the Rebel Army with
respect to the policy to be followed in the concrete Cuban situation, given the menace of foreign
invasion, the conditions of the modern world at the end of 1959 or the beginning of 1960, with the
enemy in sight, analyzed, evaluated, and awaited without fear. In other words, we are no longer
theorizing for the instruction of others about what has already been done; rather we theorize about
what has been done by others in order to apply it ourselves in our own national defense.
As our problem is to theorize about the Cuban case, and locate and test our hypothesis on the map
of American realities, we present as an epilogue the following analysis of the Cuban situation, its
present and its future.

EPILOGUE
ANALYSIS OF THE CUBAN SITUATION, ITS PRESENT AND ITS FUTURE

A year has now passed since the flight of the dictator, the culmination of a long armed civil struggle
by the Cuban people. The achievements of the government in the social, economic, and political
fields are enormous; nevertheless, it is necessary to analyze them, to evaluate each act and to show
precisely the dimensions of our Cuban Revolution. This national Revolution, fundamentally
agrarian, having the enthusiastic support of workers, of people from the middle class and today
even of owners of industry, has acquired a continental and world-wide importance, enhanced by its
peculiar characteristics and by the inflexible will of the people.
It will not be possible to present a synthesis, however brief, of all the laws passed, all of them
undoubtedly of popular benefit. It will be enough to select a few for special emphasis and to show
at the same time the logical chain that carries us forward, step by step, in a progressive and
necessary order of concern for the problems of the Cuban people.
The first alarm for the parasitic classes of the country is sounded in the rent law, the reduction of
electric rates, and government intervention in the telephone company followed by a reduction in
rates, all decreed in rapid succession. Those who had thought Fidel Castro and the men who made
this Revolution to be nothing more than politicians of the old style, manageable simpletons with
beards their only distinction, now began to suspect that something deeper was emerging from the
bosom of the Cuban people and that their privileges were in danger. The word "Communism" began
to envelop the figures of the leaders and of the triumphant guerrilla fighters; consequently the word
anti-Communism, as the position dialectically opposed, began to serve as a nucleus for all those
who resented the loss of their unjust privileges.
The law on vacant lots and the law on installment sales aggravated this sensation of malaise among
the usurious capitalists. But these were minor skirmishes with the reactionaries; everything was still
all right and possible. "This crazy fellow," Fidel Castro, could be counseled and guided to good
paths, to good "democratic" paths, by a Dubois or a Porter. It was necessary to place hope in the
future.
The Agrarian Reform law was a tremendous jolt. Most of those who had been hurt now saw clearly.
One of the first was Gaston Baquero, the voice of reaction; he had accurately interpreted what was
going to happen and had retired to quieter scenes under the Spanish dictatorship. There were still
some who thought that "the law is the law," that other governments had already promulgated such
laws, theoretically designed to help the people. Carrying out these laws was another thing. That
brash and complex child that had the initials INRA for its familiar name was treated at the
beginning with peevish and touching paternalism within the ivory towers of learning, pervaded with
social doctrines and respectable theories of public finance, to which the uncultivated and absurd
mentalities of the guerrilla fighters could not arrive. But INRA advanced like a tractor or a war
tank, because it is tractor and tank at the same time, breaking down the walls of the great estates as
it passed and creating new social relations in the ownership of land. This Cuban Agrarian Reform
appeared with various characteristics important for America. It was anti-feudal in the sense that it
eliminated the Cuban-style latifundia, annulled all contracts that called for payment of rent of land
in crops, and liquidated the servile relations that existed principally in coffee and tobacco
production, two important branches of our agriculture. But it also was an Agrarian Reform in a
capitalist medium to destroy the pressure of monopoly on human beings, isolated or joined together,

to help them work their land honorably and to produce without fear of the creditor or the master. It
had the characteristic from the first moment of assuring to peasants and agricultural workers, those
who give themselves to the soil, needed technical help from competent personnel; machinery;
financial help provided through credits from INRA or para-state banks; and big help from the
"Association of People's Stores" that has developed on a large scale in Oriente and is in process of
development in other provinces. The state stores, replacing the old usurers, provide just financing
and pay a just price for the harvest.
Compared with the other three great agrarian reforms in America (Mexico, Guatemala, and Bolivia)
the most important distinctive characteristic is the decision to carry Cuban reform all the way,
without concessions or exceptions of any kind. This total Agrarian Reform respects no rights that
are not rights of the people nor singles out any class or nationality for discriminatory treatment: the
force of the law falls equally on the United Fruit Company and on the King Ranch, as on the big
Cuban landowners.
Under these conditions land is being cleared, mainly for the production of crops which are very
important to the country, rice, oil-producing grains and cotton; these are being intensively
developed. But the nation is not satisfied and is going to recover all its stolen resources. Its rich subsoil, which has been a field of monopolist voracity and struggle, is virtually recovered by the
petroleum law. This law, like the Agrarian Reform and all the others promulgated by the
Revolution, responds to Cuba's irresistible necessities, to urgent demands of a people that wishes to
be free, that wishes to be master of its economy, that wishes to prosper and to reach ever higher
goals of social development. But for this very reason it is an example for the continent and feared
by the oil monopolies. It is not that Cuba directly hurts the petroleum monopoly substantially. There
is no reason to believe the country to be rich in reserves of the prized fuel, even though there are
reasonable hopes of obtaining a supply that will satisfy its internal needs. On the other hand, by its
law Cuba gives a palpable example to the brother peoples of America, many of them foraged by
these monopolies or pushed into intercine wars in order to satisfy the necessities or appetites of
competing trusts. At the same time Cuba shows the possibility of acting in America and the exact
hour when action ought to be considered. The great monopolies also cast their worried look upon
Cuba; not only has someone in the little island of the Caribbean dared to liquidate the interests of
the omnipotent United Fruit Company, legacy of Mr. Foster Dulles to his heirs; but also the empires
of Mr. Rockefeller and the Deutsch group have suffered under the lash of intervention by the
popular Cuban Revolution.
This law, like the mining law, is the response of the people to those who try to check them with
threats of force, with aerial incursions, with punishments of whatever type. Some say that the
mining law is as important as the Agrarian Reform. We do not consider that it has this importance
for the economy of the country in general, but it introduces another new feature: a 25 percent tax on
the amount of product exported, to be paid by companies that sell our minerals abroad (leaving now
something more than a hole in our territory). This not only contributes to our Cuban welfare; it also
increases the relative strength of the Canadian monopolies in their struggle with the present
exploiters of our nickel. Thus the Cuban Revolution liquidates the latifundia, limits the profits of
the foreign monopolies, limits the profits of the foreign intermediaries that dedicate themselves with
parasitic capital to the commerce of importation, launches upon the world a new policy in America,
dares to break the monopolist status of the giants of mining, and leaves one of them in difficulty, to
say the least. This signifies a powerful new message to the neighbors of the great stronghold of
monopoly, and causes repercussions throughout America. The Cuban Revolution breaks all the
barriers of the news syndicates and diffuses its truth like a shower of dust among the American
masses anxious for a better life. Cuba is the symbol of nationality renewed and Fidel Castro the
symbol of liberation.

By a simple law of gravity the little island of one hundred fourteen thousand square kilometers and
six and one-half million inhabitants assumes the leadership in the anti-colonial struggle in America,
in which serious handicaps in other countries permit Cuba to take the heroic, glorious and
dangerous advanced post. The economically less weak nations of colonial America, the ones in
which national capitalism develops haltingly in a continuous, relentless, and at times violent
struggle against the foreign monopolies, now cede their place gradually to this small, new champion
of liberty, since their governments do not have sufficient force to carry the fight forward. This is not
a simple task, nor is it free from danger and difficulties. The backing of a whole people and an
enormous charge of idealism and spirit of sacrifice are needed in the nearly solitary conditions in
which we are carrying it out in America. Small countries have tried to maintain this post before
Guatemala, the Guatemala of Quetzal, that dies when it is imprisoned in a cage, the Guatemala of
the Indian Tecum Umam, fell before the direct aggression of the colonialists. Bolivia, the country of
Morillo, the proto-martyr of American independence, yielded to the terrible hardships of the
struggle after setting three examples that served as the foundation of the Cuban Revolution: the
suppression of the army, agrarian reform, and nationalization of mines-maximum source of riches
and at the same time maximum source of tragedy.
Cuba knows about these previous examples, knows the failures and the difficulties, but it knows
also that we are at the dawning of a new era in the world. The pillars of colonialism have been
swept aside by the power of the national and popular struggle in Asia and Africa. Solidarity among
peoples does not now come from religion, customs, tastes, racial affinity or its lack. It arises from a
similarity in economic and social conditions and from a similarity in desire for progress and
recuperation. Asia and Africa joined hands in Bandung; Asia and Africa come to join hands with
colonial and indigenous America through Cuba, in Havana.
On the other hand, the great colonial powers have lost ground before the struggle of the peoples.
Belgium and Holland are two caricatures of empires; Germany and Italy lost their colonies. France
is bitterly fighting a war that is lost. England, diplomatic and skillful, liquidates political power
while maintaining the economic connections.
American capitalism replaced some of the old colonial capitalisms in the countries that began their
in- dependent life. But it knows that this is transitory and that there is no real security for its
financial speculations in these new territories. The octopus cannot there apply its suckers firmly.
The claw of the imperial eagle is trimmed. Colonialism is dead or is dying a natural death in all
these places.
America is something else. It has been some time since the English lion with its voracious appetite
departed from our America and the young and charming Yankee capitalists installed the
"democratic" version of the English clubs, imposing their sovereign domination over every one of
the twenty republics.
These is the colonial realm of North American monopoly, its reason for being and last hope, the
"backyard of its own house." If all the Latin American peoples should raise the flag of dignity, as
Cuba has done, monopoly would tremble; it would have to accommodate to a new politicaleconomic situation and to substantial prunings of profits. Monopoly does not like profits to be
pruned, and the Cuban example, this "bad example" of national and international dignity, is gaining
strength in the countries of America. Each time that an impudent people cries out for liberation,
Cuba is accused; and it is true in a sense that Cuba is guilty, because Cuba has shown the way, the
way of the armed popular fight against armies supposed to be invincible, the way of struggle in wild
places to wear down and destroy the enemy far from his bases, in a word, the way of dignity.
This Cuban example is bad, a very bad example, and monopoly cannot sleep quietly while this bad

example remains at its feet, defying danger, advancing toward the future. It must be destroyed,
voices declare. It is necessary to intervene in this bastion of "Communism," cry the servants of
monopoly disguised as representatives in Congress. "The Cuban situation is very disturbing," say
the artful defenders of the trusts; we all know that their meaning is: "It must be destroyed."
Very well. What are the different possibilities of aggressive action to destroy the bad example? One
could be called the purely economic. These begins with a restriction on credit by North American
banks and suppliers to all businessmen, national banks, and even the National Bank of Cuba. Credit
is thus restricted in North America, and through the medium of associates an attempt is made to
have the same policy adopted in all the countries of Western Europe; but this alone is not sufficient.
The denial of credits strikes a first strong blow at the economy, but recovery is rapid and the
commercial balance evens out, since the victimized country is accustomed to living as best it can. It
is necessary to apply more pressure. The sugar quota is brought into the picture: yes, no, no, yes.
Hurriedly the calculating machines of the agents of monopoly total up all sorts of accounts and
arrive at the final conclusion: it is very dangerous to reduce the Cuban quota and impossible to
cancel it. Why very dangerous? Because besides being bad politics, it would awaken the appetite of
ten or fifteen other supplier countries, causing them tremendous discomfort, because they would all
consider they had a right to something more. It is impossible to cancel the quota, because Cuba is
the largest, most efficient, and cheapest provider of sugar to the United States, and because sixty
percent of the interests that profit directly from the production and commerce in sugar are United
States interests. Besides, the commercial balance is favorable to the United States; whoever does
not sell cannot buy; and it would set a bad example to break a treaty. Further, the supposed North
American gift of paying nearly three cents above the market price is only the result of North
American incapacity to produce sugar cheaply. The high wages and the low productivity of the soil
prevent the Great Power from producing sugar at Cuban prices; and by paying this higher price for
a product, they are able to impose burdensome treaties on all beneficiaries, not only Cuba.
Impossible to liquidate the Cuban quota.
We do not consider likely the possibility that monopolists are employing a variant of the economic
approach in bombarding and burning sugar cane fields, hoping to cause a scarcity of the product.
Rather this appears to be a measure calculated to weaken confidence in the power of the
revolutionary government. (The corpse of the North American mercenary stains more than a Cuban
house with blood; it also stains a policy. And what is to be said of the gigantic explosion of arms
destined for the Rebel Army?)
Another vulnerable place where the Cuban economy can be squeezed is the supply of raw materials,
such as cotton. However, it is well known that there is an over-production of cotton in the world,
and any difficulty of this type would be transitory. Fuel? This is worth some attention; it is possible
to paralyze a country by depriving it of fuel, and Cuba produces very little petroleum. It has some
heavy fuel that can be used to operate its steam-driven machinery and some alcohol that can be used
in vehicles; also, there are large amounts of petroleum in the world. Egypt can sell it, the Soviet
Union can sell it, perhaps Iraq will be able to sell it shortly. It is not possible to develop a purely
economic strategy
As another possibility of aggression, if to this economic variant were added an intervention by some
puppet power, the Dominican Republic, for example, it would be somewhat more of a nuisance; but
the United Nations would doubtless intervene, with nothing concrete having been achieved.
Incidentally, the new course taken by the Organization of American States creates a dangerous
precedent of intervention. Behind the shield of the Trujillo pretext, monopoly solaces itself by

constructing a means of aggression. It is sad that the Venezuelan democracy has put us in the
difficult position of having to oppose an intervention against Trujillo. What a good turn it has done
the pirates of the continent!
Among the new possibilities of aggression is physical elimination by means of an assault on the
"old fellow," Fidel Castro, who has become by now the focus of the monopolies' wrath. Naturally,
measures must be arranged so that the other two dangerous "international agents," Raul Castro and
the author, are also eliminated. This solution is appealing; if simultaneous assaults on all three or at
least on the directing head succeeded, it would be a boon to the reaction. (But do not forget the
people, Messrs. Monopolists and agents, the omnipotent people who in their fury at such a crime
would crush and erase all those who had anything to do directly or indirectly with an assault on any
of the chiefs of the Revolution; it would be impossible to restrain them.)
Another aspect of the Guatemalan variant is to put pressure on the suppliers of arms, in order to
force Cuba to buy in Communist countries and then use this as an occasion to let loose another
shower of insults. This could give results. "It may be," someone in our government has said, "that
they will attack us as Communists, but they are not going to eliminate us as imbeciles."
Thus it begins to appear as if a direct aggression on the part of the monopolies will be necessary;
various possible forms are being shuffled and studied in the IBM machines with all processes
calculated. It occurs to us at the moment that the Spanish variant could be used. The Spanish variant
would be one in which some initial pretext is seized upon for an attack by exiles with the help of
volunteers, volunteers who would be mercenaries of course, or simply the troops of a foreign
power, well supported by navy and air, well enough supported, shall we say, to be successful. It
could also begin as a direct aggression by some state such as the Dominican Republic, which would
send some of its men, our brothers, and many mercenaries to die on these beaches in order to
provoke war; this would prompt the pure-intentioned monopolists to say that they do not wish to
intervene in this "disastrous" struggle between brothers; they will merely limit and confine and
freeze the war within its present limits by maintaining vigilance over the skies and seas of this part
of America with cruisers, battleships, destroyers, aircraft carriers, submarines, minesweepers,
torpedo boats, and airplanes. And it could happen that while these zealous guardians of continental
peace were not allowing a single boat to pass with things for Cuba, some, many, or all of the boats
headed for the unhappy country of Trujillo would escape the iron vigilance. Also they might
intervene through some "reputable" inter-American organ, to put an end to the "foolish war" that
"Communism" had unleashed in our island; or, if this mechanism of the "reputable" American
organ did not serve, they might intervene directly, as in Korea, using the name of the international
organ in order to restore peace and protect the interests of all nations.
Perhaps the first step in the aggression will not be against us, but against the constitutional
government of Venezuela, in order to liquidate our last point of support on the continent. If this
happens, it is possible that the center of the struggle against colonialism will move from Cuba to the
great country of Bolivar. The people of Venezuela will rise to defend their liberties with all the
enthusiasm of those who know that they are fighting a decisive battle, that behind defeat lies the
darkest tyranny and behind victory the certain future of America. A stream of popular struggles can
disturb the peace of the monopolist cemeteries formed out of our subjugated sister republics.
Many reasons argue against the chance of enemy victory, but there are two fundamental ones. The
first is external: this is the year 1960, the year that will finally hear the voices of the millions of
beings who do not have the luck to be governed by the possessors of the means of death and
payment. Further, and this is an even more powerful reason, an army of six million Cubans will
grasp weapons as a single man in order to defend its territory and its Revolution. Cuba will be a
battlefield where the army will be nothing other than part of the people in arms. After destruction in

a frontal war, hundreds of guerrilla bands under a dynamic command and a single center of
orientation, will fight the battle all over the country. In cities the workers will die in their factories
or centers of work, and in the country the peasants will deal out death to the invader from behind
every palm tree and from every furrow of the new mechanically plowed field that the Revolution
has given them.
And around the world international solidarity will create a barrier of hundreds of millions of people
protesting against aggression. Monopoly will see how its pillars are undermined and how the spider
web curtain of its newspaper lies is swept away by a puff. But let us suppose that they dare to defy
the popular indignation of the world; what will happen here within?
The first thing to be noted, given our position as an easily vulnerable island without heavy arms,
with a very weak air force and navy, is the necessity of applying the guerrilla concept to the fight
for national defense. Our ground units will fight with the fervor, decision, and enthusiasm of which
the sons of the Cuban Revolution are capable in these glorious years of our history. But if the worst
occurs, we are prepared to continue fighting even after the destruction of our army organization in a
frontal combat. In other words, confronting large concentrations of enemy forces that succeed in
destroying ours, we would change immediately into a guerrilla army with a good sense of mobility,
with unlimited authority in our column commanders, though with a central command located
somewhere in the country giving the necessary direction and fixing the general overall strategy.
The mountains would be the last line of defense of the organized armed vanguard of the people,
which is the Rebel Army; but in every house of the people, on every road, in every forest, in every
piece of national territory the struggle would be fought by the great army of the rearguard, the entire
people trained and armed in the manner now to be described.
Since our infantry units will not have heavy arms, they will concentrate on anti-tank and anti-air
defense. Mines in very large numbers, bazookas or anti-tank grenades, anti-aircraft cannon of great
mobility and mortar batteries will be the only arms of any great power. The veteran infantry soldier,
though equipped with automatic weapons, will know the value of ammunition. He will guard it with
loving care. Special installations for reloading shells will accompany each unit of the army,
maintaining reserves of ammunition even though precariously.
The air force will probably be badly hurt in the first moments of an invasion of this type. We are
basing our calculations upon an invasion by a first-class foreign power or by a mercenary army of
some other power, helped either openly or surreptitiously by this great power of first magnitude.
The national air force, as I said, will be destroyed, or almost destroyed: only reconnaissance or
liaison planes will remain, especially helicopters for minor functions.
The navy will also be organized for this mobile strategy; small launches will give the smallest target
to the enemy and maintain maximum mobility. The great desperation of the enemy army in this
case as before will be to find something to receive his blows. Instead he will find a gelatinous mass,
in movement, impenetrable, that retreats and never presents a solid front, though it inflicts wounds
from every side.
It is not easy to overcome an army of the people that is prepared to continue being an army in spite
of its defeat in a frontal battle. Two great masses of the people are united around it: the peasants and
the workers. The peasants have already given evidence of their efficiency in detaining the small
band that was marauding in Pinar del Rio. These peasants will be trained principally in their own
regions; but the platoon commanders and the superior officers will be trained, as is now already
being done, in our military bases. From there they will be distributed throughout the thirty zones of
agrarian development that form the new geographical division of the country. This will constitute

thirty more centers of peasant struggle, charged with defending to the maximum their lands, their
social conquests, their new houses, their canals, their dams, their flowering harvests, their
independence, in a word, their right to live.
At the beginning they will oppose also a firm resistance to any enemy advance, but if this proves
too strong for them, they will disperse, each peasant becoming a peaceful cultivator of his soil
during the day and a fearsome guerrilla fighter at night, scourge of the enemy forces. Something
similar will take place among the workers; the best among them will be trained also to serve
thereafter as chiefs of their companions, teaching them principles of defense. Each social class,
however, will have different tasks. The peasant will fight a battle typical of the guerrilla fighter; he
should learn to be a good shot, to take advantage of all the difficulties of the ground and to
disappear without ever showing his face. The workers, on the other hand, have the advantage of
being within a modern city, which is a large and efficient fortress; at the same time their lack of
mobility is a drawback. The worker will learn first to block the streets with barricades of any
available vehicle, furniture, or utensil; to use every block as a fortress with communications formed
by holes made in interior walls; to use that terrible arm of defense, the "Molotov cocktail"; and to
coordinate his fire from the innumerable loop-holes provided by the houses of a modern city.
From the worker masses assisted by the national police and those armed forces charged with the
defense of the city, a powerful block of the army will be formed; but it must expect to suffer great
losses. The struggle in the cities in these conditions cannot achieve the facility and flexibility of the
struggle in the countryside: many will fall, including many leaders, in this popular struggle. The
enemy will use tanks that will be destroyed rapidly as soon as the people learn their weaknesses and
not to fear them; but before that the tanks will leave their balance of victims.
There will also be other organizations related to those of workers and peasants: first, the student
militias, which will contain the flower of the student youth, directed and coordinated by the Rebel
Army; organizations of youth in general, who will participate in the same way; and organizations of
women, who will provide an enormous encouragement by their presence and who will do such
auxiliary tasks for their companions in the struggle as cooking, taking care of the wounded, giving
final comfort to those who are dying, doing laundry, in a word, showing their companions-in-arms
that they will never be absent in the difficult moments of the Revolution. All this is achieved by
wide-scale organization of the masses supplemented with patient and careful education, an
education that begins and is confirmed in knowledge acquired from their own experience; it should
concentrate on reasoned and true explanations of the facts of the Revolution.
The revolutionary laws should be discussed, explained, studied in every meeting, in every
assembly, wherever the leaders of the Revolution are present for any purpose. Also, the speeches of
the leaders, and in our case particularly of the undisputed leader, should constantly be read,
commented upon, and discussed. People should come together in the country to listen by radio, and
where there are more advanced facilities, to watch by television these magnificent popular lessons
that our Prime Minister gives.
The participation of the people in politics, that is to say, in the expression of their own desires made
into laws, decrees, and resolutions, should be constant. Vigilance against any manifestations
opposed to the Revolution should also be constant; and vigilance over morale within the
revolutionary masses should be stricter, if this is possible, than vigilance against the nonrevolutionary or the disaffected. It can never be permitted, lest the Revolution take the dangerous
path of opportunism, that a revolutionary of any category should be excused for grave offenses
against decorum or morality simply because he is a revolutionary. The record of his former services
may provide extenuating circumstances and they can always be considered in deciding upon the
punishment, but the act itself must always be punished.

Respect for work, above all for collective work and work for collective ends, ought to be cultivated.
Volunteer brigades to construct roads, bridges, docks or dams, and school cities should receive a
strong impulse; these serve to forge a unity among persons showing their love for the Revolution
with works.
An army that is linked in such ways with the people, that feels this intimacy with the peasants and
the workers from which it emerged, that knows besides all the special techniques of its warfare and
is psychologically prepared for the worst contingencies, is invincible; and it will be even more
invincible as it makes the just phrase of our immortal Camilo a part of the flesh of the army and the
citizenry: "The army is the people in uniform." Therefore, for all these reasons, despite the necessity
that monopoly suppress the "bad example" of Cuba, our future is brighter than ever.
END OF GUERRILLA WARFARE

