On Guerrilla Warfare
Mao Zedong
1937

Typeset by RedLibrary. xyz .

2

Contents
1 What Is Guerrilla Warfare?

5

2 The Relation of Guerrilla Hostilities to Regular Operations

11

3 Guerrilla Warfare In History

15

4 Can Victory Be Attained By Guerrilla Operations?

19

5 Organization For Guerrilla Warfare

23

6 The Political Problems Of Guerrilla Warfare

33

7 The Strategy Of Guerrilla Resistance Against Japan

37

8 Appendix

47

3

1 What Is Guerrilla Warfare?
In a war of revolutionary character, guerrilla operations are a necessary part. This is
particularly true in war waged for the emancipation of a people who inhabit a vast
nation. China is such a nation, a nation whose techniques are undeveloped and whose
communications are poor. She finds herself confronted with a strong and victorious
Japanese imperialism. Under these circumstances, the development of the type of guerrilla warfare characterized by the quality of mass is both necessary and natural. This
warfare must be developed to an unprecedented degree and it must coordinate with the
operations of our regular armies. If we fail to do this, we will find it difficult to defeat
the enemy.
These guerrilla operations must not be considered as an independent form of warfare.
They are but one step in the total war, one aspect of the revolutionary struggle. They
are the inevitable result of the clash between oppressor and oppressed when the latter
reach the limits of their endurance. In our case, these hostilities began at a time when
the people were unable to endure any more from the Japanese imperialists. Lenin, in
People and Revolution 1 , said: “A people’s insurrection and a people’s revolution are not
only natural but inevitable.” We consider guerrilla operations as but one aspect of our
total or mass war because they, lacking the quality of independence, are of themselves
incapable of providing a solution to the struggle.
Guerrilla warfare has qualities and objectives peculiar to itself. It is a weapon that
a nation inferior in arms and military equipment may employ against a more powerful
aggressor nation. When the invader pierces deep into the heart of the weaker country
and occupies her territory in a cruel and oppressive manner, there is no doubt that
conditions of terrain, climate, and society in general offer obstacles to his progress and
may be used to advantage by those who oppose him. In guerrilla warfare we turn these
advantages to the purpose of resisting and defeating the enemy.
During the progress of hostilities, guerrillas gradually develop into orthodox forces
that operate in conjunction with other units of the regular army. Thus the regularly
organized troops, those guerrillas who have attained that status, and those who have
not reached that level of development combine to form the military power of a national
revolutionary war. There can be no doubt that the ultimate result of this will be victory.
Both in its development and in its method of application, guerrilla warfare has certain
distinctive characteristics. We first will discuss the relationship of guerrilla warfare
to national policy. Because ours is the resistance of a semi colonial country against
an imperialism, our hostilities must have a clearly defined political goal and firmly
established political responsibilities. Our basic policy is the creation of a national united
1

Lenin never wrote a document under that title.

5

1 What Is Guerrilla Warfare?
anti-Japanese front. This policy we pursue in order to gain our political goal, which is
the complete emancipation of the Chinese people. There are certain fundamental steps
necessary in the realization of this policy, to wit:
1. Arousing and organizing the people.
2. Achieving internal unification politically.
3. Establishing bases.
4. Equipping forces.
5. Recovering national strength.
6. Destroying enemy’s national strength.
7. Regaining lost territories.
There is no reason to consider guerrilla warfare separately from national policy. On
the contrary, it must be organized and conducted in complete accord with national antiJapanese policy. It is only who misinterpret guerrilla action who say, as does Jen Ch’i
Shan, “The question of guerrilla hostilities is purely a military matter and not a political
one.” Those who maintain this simple point of view have lost sight of the political goal
and the political effects of guerrilla action. Such a simple point of view will cause the
people to lose confidence and will result in our defeat.
What is the relationship of guerrilla warfare to the people? Without a political goal,
guerrilla warfare must fail, as it must, if its political objectives do not coincide with
the aspirations of the people and their sympathy, cooperation, and assistance cannot
be gained. The essence of guerrilla warfare is thus revolutionary in character. On the
other hand, in a war of counter-revolutionary nature, there is no place for guerrilla
hostilities. Because guerrilla warfare basically derives from the masses and is supported
by them, it can neither exist nor flourish if it separates itself from their sympathies
and co-operation. There are those who do not comprehend guerrilla action, and who
therefore do not understand the distinguishing qualities of a people’s guerrilla war, who
say: “Only regular troops can carry on guerrilla operations.” There are others who,
because they do not believe in the ultimate success of guerrilla action, mistakenly say:
“Guerrilla warfare is an insignificant and highly specialized type of operation in which
there is no place for the masses of the people” (Jen Ch’i Shan). Then there are those
who ridicule the masses and undermine resistance by wildly asserting that the people
have no understanding of the war of resistance (Yeh Ch’ing, for one). The moment
that this war of resistance dissociates itself from the masses of the people is the precise
moment that it dissociates itself from hope of ultimate victory over the Japanese.
What is the organization for guerrilla warfare? Though all guerrilla bands that spring
from the masses of the people suffer from lack of organization at the time of their
formation, they all have in common a basic quality that makes organization possible.
All guerrilla units must have political and military leadership. This is true regardless

6

of the source or size of such units. Such units may originate locally, in the masses of
the people; they may be formed from an admixture of regular troops with groups of the
people, or they may consist of regular army units intact. And mere quantity does not
affect this matter. Such units may consist of a squad of a few men, a battalion of several
hundred men, or a regiment of several thousand men.
All these must have leaders who are unyielding in their policies–resolute, loyal, sincere,
and robust. These men must be well-educated in revolutionary technique, self confident,
able to establish severe discipline, and able to cope with counter-propaganda. In short,
these leaders must be models for the people. As the war progresses, such leaders lack
of discipline which at first will gradually overcome the lack of discipline which at first
prevails; they will establish discipline in their forces, strengthening them and increasing
their combat efficiency. Thus eventual victory will be attained.
Unorganized guerrilla warfare cannot contribute to victory and those who attack the
movement as a combination of banditry and anarchism do not understand the nature
of guerrilla action. They say, “This movement is a haven for disappointed militarists,
vagabonds, and bandits,”2 hoping thus to bring the movement into disrepute. We do not
deny that there are corrupt guerrillas, nor that there are people who under the guise of
guerrillas indulge in unlawful activities. Neither do we deny that the movement has at the
present time symptoms of a lack of organization, symptoms that might indeed be serious
were we to judge guerrilla warfare solely by the corrupt and temporary phenomena we
have mentioned. We should study the corrupt phenomena and attempt to eradicate them
in order to encourage guerrilla warfare, and to increase its military efficiency. “This is
hard work, there is no help for it, and the problem cannot be solved immediately. The
whole people must try to reform themselves during the course of the war. We must
educate them and reform them in the light of past experience. Evil does not exist
in guerrilla warfare but only in the unorganized and undisciplined activities that are
anarchism,” said Lenin, in On Guerrilla Warfare.3
What is basic guerrilla strategy? Guerrilla strategy must be based primarily on alertness, mobility, and attack. It must be adjusted to the enemy situation, the terrain, the
existing lines of communication, the relative strengths, the weather and the situation of
the people.
In guerrilla warfare, select the tactic of seeming to come from the east and attacking
from the west; avoid the solid, attack the hollow; attack; withdraw; deliver a lightning
blow, seek a lightning decision. When guerrillas engage a stronger enemy, they withdraw
when he advances; harass him when he stops; strike him when he is weary; pursue him
when he withdraws. In guerrilla strategy, the enemy’s rear, flanks, and other vulnerable
spots are his vital points, and there he must be harassed, attacked, dispersed, exhausted
and annihilated. Only in this way can guerrillas carry out their mission of independent
guerrilla action and coordination with the effort of the regular armies. But, in spite
of the most complete preparation, there can be no victory if mistakes are made in the
matter of command. guerrilla warfare based on the principles we have mentioned and
2
3

Jen Ch’i Shan
This is a misquote.

7

1 What Is Guerrilla Warfare?
carried out over a vast extent of territory in which communications are inconvenient
will contribute tremendously towards ultimate defeat of the Japanese and consequent
emancipation of the Chinese people.
A careful distinction must be made between two types of guerrilla warfare. The fact
that revolutionary guerrilla warfare is based on the masses of the people does not in
itself mean that the organization of guerrilla units is impossible in a war of counterrevolutionary character. As examples of the former type we may cite Red guerrilla
hostilities during the Russian Revolution; those of the Reds China; of the Abyssinians
against the Italians for the past three years; those of the last seven years in Manchuria,
and the vast anti-Japanese guerrilla war that is carried on in China today. All these
struggles have been carried on in the interest of the whole people or the greater part
of them; all had a broad basis in the national manpower and all have been in accord
with the laws of historical development. They have existed and will continue to exist,
flourish, and develop as long as they are not contrary to national policy.
The second type of guerrilla warfare directly contradicts the law of historical development. Of this type, we may cite the examples furnished by the White Russian guerrilla
units organized by Denikin and Kolchak; those organized by the Japanese; those organized by the Italians in Abyssinia; those supported by the puppet governments in
Manchuria and Mongolia, and those that will be organized here by Chinese traitors.
All such have oppressed the masses and have been contrary to the true interests of the
people. They must be firmly opposed. They are easy to destroy because they lack a
broad foundation in the people.
If we fail to differentiate between the two types of guerrilla hostilities mentioned, it is
likely that we will exaggerate their effect when applied by an invader. We might arrive
at the conclusion that “the invader can organize guerrilla units from among the people.”
Such a conclusion might well diminish our confidence in guerrilla warfare. As far as this
matter is concerned, we have but to remember the historical experience of revolutionary
struggles.
Further, we must distinguish general revolutionary wars from those of a purely ‘class’
type. In the former case, the whole people of a nation, without regard to class or party,
carry on a guerrilla struggle that is an instrument of the national policy. Its basis is,
therefore, much broader than is the basis of a struggle of class type. Of a general guerrilla
war, it has been said: “When a nation is invaded, the people become sympathetic to one
another and all aid in organizing guerrilla units. In civil war, no matter to what extent
guerrillas are developed, they do not produce the same results as when they are formed
to resist an invasion by foreigners.”4 The one strong feature of guerrilla warfare in a
civil struggle is its quality of internal purity. One class may be easily united and perhaps
fight with great effect, whereas in a national revolutionary war, guerrilla units are faced
with the problem of internal unification of different class groups. This necessitates the
use of propaganda. Both types of guerrilla war are, however, similar in that they both
employ the same military methods.
National guerrilla warfare, though historically of the same consistency, has employed
4

8

Civil War in Russia

varying implements as times, peoples, and conditions differ. The guerrilla aspects of the
Opium War, those of the fighting in Manchuria since the Mukden incident, and those
employed in China today are all slightly different. The guerrilla warfare conducted by
the Moroccans against the French and the Spanish was not exactly similar to that which
we conduct today in China. These differences express the characteristics of different
peoples in different periods. Although there is a general similarity in the quality of all
these struggles, there are dissimilarities in form. This fact we must recognize. Clausewitz
wrote, in On War : “Wars in every period have independent forms and independent conditions, and, therefore, every period must have its independent theory of war.” Lenin,
in On Guerrilla Warfare said: “As regards the form of fighting, it is unconditionally
requisite that history be investigated in order to discover the conditions of environment,
the state of economic progress and the political ideas that obtained, the national characteristics, customs, and degree of civilization.” Again: “It is necessary to be completely
unsympathetic to abstract formulas and rules and to study with sympathy the conditions of the actual fighting, for these will change in accordance with the political and
economic situations and the realization of the people’s aspirations. These progressive
changes in conditions create new methods.”
If, in today’s struggle, we fail to apply the historical truths of revolutionary guerrilla
war, we will fall into the error of believing with T’ou Hsi Sheng that under the impact
of Japan’s mechanized army, “the guerrilla unit has lost its historical function.” Jen
Ch’i Shan writes: “In olden days guerrilla warfare was part of regular strategy but there
is almost no chance that it can be applied today.” These opinions are harmful. If we
do not make an estimate of the characteristics peculiar to our anti-Japanese guerrilla
war, but insist on applying to it mechanical formulas derived from past history, we are
making the mistake of placing our hostilities in the same category as all other national
guerrilla struggles. If we hold this view, we will simply be beating our heads against a
stone wall and we will be unable to profit from guerrilla hostilities.
To summarize: What is the guerrilla war of resistance against Japan? It is one aspect
of the entire war, which, although alone incapable of producing the decision, attacks the
enemy in every quarter, diminishes the extent of area under his control, increases our
national strength, and assists our regular armies. It is one of the strategic instruments
used to inflict defeat on our enemy. It is the one pure expression of anti-Japanese policy,
that is to say, it is military strength organized by the active people and inseparable from
them. It is a powerful special weapon with which we resist the Japanese and without
which we cannot defeat them.

9

2 The Relation of Guerrilla Hostilities
to Regular Operations
The general features of orthodox hostilities, that is, the war of position and the war
of movement, differ fundamentally from guerrilla warfare. There are other readily apparent differences such as those in organization, armament, equipment supply, tactics,
command; in conception of the terms ‘front’ and ‘rear’; in the matter of military responsibilities.
When considered from the point of view of total numbers, guerrilla units are many,
as individual combat units, they may vary in size from the smallest, of several score
or several hundred men, to the battalion or the regiment, of several thousand. This is
not the case in regularly organized units. A primary feature of guerrilla operations is
their dependence upon the people themselves to organize battalions and other units. As
a result of this, organization depends largely upon local circumstances. In the case of
guerrilla groups, the standard of equipment is of a low order and they must depend for
their sustenance primarily upon what the locality affords.
The strategy of guerrilla warfare is manifestly unlike that employed in orthodox operations, as the basic tactic of the former is constant activity and movement. There
is in guerrilla warfare no such thing as a decisive battle; there is nothing comparable
to the fixed, passive defence that characterizes orthodox war. In guerrilla warfare, the
transformation of a moving situation into a positional defensive situation never arises.
The general features of reconnaissance, partial deployment, general deployment, and
development of the attack that are usual in mobile warfare are not common in guerrilla
war.
There are differences also in the matter of leadership and command. In guerrilla
warfare, small units acting independently play the principal role and there must be
no excessive interference with their activities. In orthodox warfare particularly in a
moving situation, a certain degree of initiative is accorded subordinates, but in principle,
command is centralized. This is done because all units and all supporting arms in all
districts must co-ordinate to the highest degree. In the case of guerrilla warfare, this is
not only undesirable but impossible. Only adjacent guerrilla units can coordinate their
activities to any degree. Strategically, their activities can be roughly correlated with
those of the regular forces, and tactically, they must co-operate with adjacent units of
the regular army. But there are no strictures on the extent of guerrilla activity nor is it
primarily characterized by the quality of cooperation of many units.
When we discuss the terms ‘front’ and ‘rear’ it must be remembered, that while
guerrillas do have bases, their primary field of activity is in the enemy’s rear areas.
They themselves have no rear. Because an orthodox army has rear installations (except

11

2 The Relation of Guerrilla Hostilities to Regular Operations
in some special cases as during the 10,000 mile Long march of the Red Army or as in
the case of certain units operating in Shanxi Province), it cannot operate as guerrillas
can.
As to the matter of military responsibilities, those of the guerrillas are to exterminate
small forces of the enemy; to harass and weaken large forces; to attack enemy lines of
communications; to establish bases capable of supporting independent operations in the
enemy’s rear, to force the enemy to disperse his strength; and to co-ordinate all these
activities with those of the regular armies on distant battle fronts.
From the foregoing summary of differences that exist between guerrilla warfare and
orthodox warfare, it can be seen that it is improper to compare the two. Further
distinction must be made in order to clarify this matter. While the Eighth Route Army
is a regular army, its North China campaign is essentially guerrilla in nature, for it
operates in enemy’s rear. On occasion, however, Eighth Route Army commanders have
concentrated powerful forces to strike an enemy in motion and the characteristics of
orthodox mobile warfare were evident in the battle at P’ing Hsing Kuan and in other
engagements.
On the other hand, after the fall of Feng Ling Tu, the operations of Central Shanxi,
and Suiyuan, troops were more guerrilla than orthodox in nature. In this connection the
precise character of Generalissimo Chiang’s instructions to the effect that independent
brigades would carry out guerrilla operations should be recalled. In spite of such temporary activities these orthodox units retained their identity and after the fall of Feng Line
Tu, they were not only able to fight along orthodox lines but often found it necessary to
do so. This is an example of the fact that orthodox armies may, due to changes in the
situation, temporarily function as guerrillas.
Likewise, guerrilla units formed from the people may gradually develop into regular
units and, when operating as such, employ the tactics of orthodox mobile war. While
these units function as guerrillas, they may be compared to innumerable gnats, which, by
biting a giant both in front and in rear, ultimately exhaust him. They make themselves
as unendurable as a group of cruel and hateful devils, and as they grow and attain
gigantic proportions, they will find that their victim is not only exhausted but practically
perishing. It is for this very reason that our guerrilla activities are a source of constant
mental worry to Imperial Japan.
While it is improper to confuse orthodox with guerrilla operations, it is equally improper to consider that there is a chasm between the two. While differences do exist,
similarities appear under certain conditions and this fact must be appreciated if we wish
to establish clearly the relationship between the two. If we consider both types of warfare as a single subject, or if we confuse guerrilla warfare with the mobile operations
of orthodox war, we fall into this error : We exaggerate the function of guerrillas and
minimize that of the regular armies. If we agree with Chang Tso Hua, who says - “Guerrilla warfare is the primary war strategy of a people seeking to emancipate itself,” or
with Gao Gang, who believes that “Guerrilla strategy is the only strategy possible for
oppressed people,” we are exaggerating the importance of guerrilla hostilities. What
these zealous friends I have just quoted do not realize is this: If we do not fit guerrilla
operations into their proper niche, we cannot promote them realistically. Then, not only

12

would those who oppose take advantage of our varying opinions to turn them to the own
uses to undermine us, but guerrillas would be led assume responsibilities they could not
successfully discharge and that should properly be carried out by orthodox force. In the
meantime, the important guerrilla function of coordinating activities with the regular
forces would be neglected.
Furthermore, if the theory that guerrilla warfare is our only strategy were actually
applied, the regular forces would be weakened, we would be divided in purpose, and
guerrilla hostilities would decline. If we say, ‘Let us transform the regular forces into
guerrillas,’ and do not place our first reliance on a victory to be gained by the regular
armies over the enemy, we may certainly expect to see as a result the failure of the
anti-Japanese war of resistance. The concept that guerrilla warfare is an end in itself
and that guerrilla activities can be divorced from those of the regular forces is incorrect.
If we assume that guerrilla warfare does not progress from beginning to end beyond its
elementary forms, we have failed to recognize the fact that guerrilla hostilities can, under
specific conditions, develop and assume orthodox characteristics. An opinion that admits
the existence of guerrilla war, but isolates it, is one that does not properly estimate the
potentialities of such war.
Equally dangerous is the concept that condemns guerrilla war on the ground that
war has no other aspects than the purely orthodox. This opinion is often expressed by
those who have seen the corrupt phenomena of some guerrilla regimes, observed their
lack of discipline, and have seen them used as a screen behind which certain persons
have indulged in bribery and other corrupt practices. These people will not admit the
fundamental necessity for guerrilla bands that spring from the armed people. They say,
‘Only the regular forces are capable of conducting guerrilla operations.’ This theory is
a mistaken one and would lead to the abolition of the people’s guerrilla war.
A proper conception of the relationship that exists between guerrilla effort and that
of the regular forces is essential. We believe it can be stated this way: “Guerrilla
operations during the anti-Japanese war may for certain time and temporarily become
its paramount feature, particularly insofar as the enemy’s rear is concerned. However, if
we view the war as a whole, there can be no doubt that our regular forces are of primary
importance, because it is they who are alone capable of producing the decision. Guerrilla
warfare assists them in producing this favorable decision. Orthodox forces may under
certain conditions operate as guerrillas, and the latter may, under certain conditions,
develop to the status of the former. However, both guerrilla forces and regular forces
have their own respective development and their proper combinations.”
To clarify the relationship between the mobile aspect of orthodox war and guerrilla
war, we may say that general agreement exists that the principal element of our strategy
must be mobility. With the war of movement, we may at times combine the war of
position. Both of these are assisted by general guerrilla hostilities. It is true that on
the battlefield mobile war often becomes positional; it is true that this situation may be
reversed; it is equally true that each form may combine with the other. The possibility of
such combination will become more evident after the prevailing standards of equipment
have been raised. For example, in a general strategical counter-attack to recapture key
cities and lines of communication, it would be normal to use both mobile and positional

13

2 The Relation of Guerrilla Hostilities to Regular Operations
methods. However, the point must again be made that our fundamental strategical form
must be the war of movement. If we deny this, we cannot arrive at the victorious solution
of the war. In sum, while we must promote guerrilla warfare as a necessary strategical
auxiliary to orthodox operations, we must neither assign it the primary position in our
war strategy nor substitute it for mobile and positional warfare as conducted by orthodox
forces.

14

3 Guerrilla Warfare In History
Guerrilla warfare is neither a product of China nor peculiar to the present day. From
the earliest historical days, it has been a feature of wars fought by every class of men
against invaders and oppressors. Under suitable conditions, it has great possibilities.
The many guerrilla wars in history have their points of difference, their peculiar characteristics, their varying processes and conclusions, and we must respect and profit by the
experience of those whose blood was shed in them. What a pity it is that the priceless
experience gained during the several hundred wars waged by the peasants of China cannot be marshaled today to guide us. Our only experience in guerrilla hostilities has been
that gained from the several conflicts that have been carried on against us by foreign imperialists. But that experience should help the fighting Chinese recognize the necessity
for guerrilla warfare and should confirm them in confidence of ultimate victory.
In September 1812, Napoleon, in the course of swallowing all of Europe, invaded
Russia at the head of a great army totaling several hundred thousand infantry, cavalry, and artillery. At that time, Russia was weak and her ill-prepared army was not
concentrated. The most important phase of her strategy was the use made of Cossack
cavalry and detachments of peasants to carry on guerrilla operations. After giving up
Moscow, the Russians formed nine guerrilla divisions of about five hundred men each.
These, and vast groups of organized peasants, carried on partisan warfare and continually harassed the French Army. When the French Army was withdrawing, cold and
starving, Russian guerrillas blocked the way and, in combination with regular troops,
carried out counterattacks on the French rear, pursuing and defeating them. The army
of the heroic Napoleon was almost entirely annihilated, and the guerrillas captured many
officers, men, cannon, and rifles. Though the victory was the result of various factors
and depended largely on the activities of the regular army the function of the partisan
groups was extremely important. The corrupt and poorly organized country that was
Russia defeated and destroyed an army led by the most famous soldier of Europe and
won the war in spite of the fact that her ability to organize guerrilla regimes was not
fully developed. At times, guerrilla groups were hindered in their operations and the
supply of equipment and arms was insufficient. If we use the Russian saying, it was a
case of a battle between “the fist and the axe.”1
From 1918 to 1920, the Russian Soviets, because of the opposition and intervention
of foreign imperialists and the internal disturbances of White Russian groups, were
forced to organize themselves in occupied territories and fight a real war. In Siberia and
Alashan, in the rear of the army of the traitor Denikin and in the rear of the Poles,
there were many Red Russian guerrillas. These not only disrupted and destroyed the
1

Ivanov

15

3 Guerrilla Warfare In History
communications in the enemy’s rear but also frequently prevented his advance. On
one occasion, the guerrillas completely destroyed a retreating White Army that had
previously been defeated by regular Red forces. Kolchak, Denikin, the Japanese, and
the Poles, owing to the necessity of staving off the attacks of guerrillas, were forced to
withdraw regular troops from the front. “Thus not only was the enemy’s manpower
impoverished but he found himself unable to cope with the ever-moving guerrilla.”2
The development of guerrillas at that time had only reached the stage where there were
detached groups of several thousands in strength, old, middle-aged, and young. The old
men organized themselves into propaganda groups known as ‘silver-haired units’; there
was a suitable guerrilla activity for the middle-aged; the young men formed combat
units, and there were even groups for the children. Among the leaders were determined
Communists who carried on general political work among the people. These, although
they opposed the doctrine of extreme guerrilla warfare, were quick to oppose those who
condemned it. Experience tells us that “Orthodox armies are the fundamental and
principal power, guerrilla units are secondary to them and assist in the accomplishment
of the mission assigned the regular forces.”3 Many of the guerrilla regimes in Russia
gradually developed until in battle they were able to discharge functions of organized
regulars. The army of the famous General Galen was entirely derived from guerrillas.
During seven months in 1935 and 1936, the Abyssinians lost their war against Italy.
The cause of defeat — aside from the most important political reasons that there were
dissentient political groups, no strong government party, and unstable policy—was the
failure to adopt a positive policy of mobile warfare. There was never a combination of
the war of movement with large-scale guerrilla operations. Ultimately, the Abyssinians
adopted a purely passive defence, with the result that they were unable to defeat the
Italians. In addition to this, the fact that Abyssinia is a relatively small and sparsely
populated country was contributory. Even in spite of the fact that the Abyssinian Army
and its equipment were not modern, she was able to withstand a mechanized Italian
force of 400,000 for seven months. During that period, there were several occasions
when a war of movement was combined with large-scale guerrilla operations to strike
the Italians heavy blows. Moreover, several cities were retaken and casualties totaling
140,000 were inflicted. Had this policy been steadfastly continued, it would have been
difficult to have named the ultimate winner. At the present time, guerrilla activities
continue in Abyssinia, and if the internal political questions can be solved, an extension
of such activities is probable.
In 1841 and 1842, when brave people from San Yuan Li fought the English; again from
1850 to 1864, during the Taiping War, and for a third time in 1899 in the Boxer Uprising,
guerrilla tactics were employed to a remarkable degree. Particularly was this so during
the Taiping War, when guerrilla operations were most extensive and the Ch’ing troops
were often completely exhausted and forced to flee for their lives.
In these wars, there were no guiding principles of guerrilla action. Perhaps these guerrilla hostilities were not carried out in conjunction with regular operations, or perhaps
2
3

The Nature of Guerrilla Action
Gusev, Lessons of the Civil War in Russia

16

there was a lack of coordination. But the fact that victory was not gained was not
because of any lack in guerrilla activity but rather because of the interference of politics
in military affairs. Experience shows that if precedence is not given to the question of
conquering the enemy in both political and military affairs, and if regular hostilities are
not conducted with tenacity, guerrilla operations alone cannot produce final victory.
From 1927 to 1936, the Chinese Red Army fought almost continually and employed
guerrilla tactics contently. At the very beginning, a positive policy was adopted. Many
bases were established, and from guerrilla bands, the Reds were able to develop into
regular armies. As these armies fought, new guerrilla regimes were developed over a
wide area. These regimes co-ordinated their efforts with those of the regular forces This
policy accounted for the many victories gained by the guerrilla troops relatively few in
number, who were armed with weapons inferior to those of their opponents. The leaders
of that period properly combined guerrilla operations with a war of movement both
strategically and tactically. They depended primarily upon alertness. They stressed
the correct basis for both political affaires and military operations. They developed
their guerrilla bands into trained units. They then determined upon a ten year period
of resistance during which time they overcame innumerable difficulties and have only
lately reached their goal of direct participation in the anti-Japanese war. There is no
doubt that the internal unification of China is now a permanent and definite fact, and
that the experience gained during our internal struggles has proved to be both necessary
and advantageous to us in the struggle against Japanese imperialism. There are many
valuable lessons we can learn from the experience of those years. Principle among them
is the fact that guerrilla success largely depend upon powerful political leaders who work
unceasingly to bring about internal unification. Such leaders must work with the people;
they must have a correct conception of the policy to be adopted as regards both the
people and the enemy.
After 18 September 1931, strong anti-Japanese guerrilla campaigns were opened in
each of the three north-east provinces. Guerrilla activity persists there in spite of the
cruelties and deceits practiced by the Japanese at the expense of the people, and in
spite of the fact that her armies have occupied the land and oppressed the people for
the last seven years. The struggle can be divided into two periods. During the first,
which extended from 18 September 1931 to January 1933, anti-Japanese guerrilla activity
exploded constantly in all three provinces. Ma Zhanshan and Su Ping Wei established
an anti-Japanese regime in Heilungkiang. In Chi Lin. the National Salvation Army and
the Self-Defence Army were led by Wang Te Lin and Li Tu respectively. In Feng T’ien4 ,
Chu Lu and others commanded guerrilla units The influence of these forces was great.
They harassed the Japanese unceasingly, but because there was an indefinite political
goal, improper leadership, failure to co ordinate military command and operations and
to work with the people, and, finally, failure to delegate proper political functions to the
army, the whole organization was feeble, and its strength was not unified. As a direct
result of these conditions, the campaigns failed and the troops were finally defeated by
our enemy.
4

RL: Today this province is known as Liaoning.

17

3 Guerrilla Warfare In History
During the second period, which has extended from January 1933 to the present
time, the situation has greatly improved, This has come about because great numbers of
people who have been oppressed by the enemy have decided to resist him, because of the
participation of the Chinese Communists in the anti-Japanese warm and because of the
fine work of the volunteer units. The guerrillas have finally educated the people to the
meaning of guerrilla warfare, and in the north-east, it has again become an important
and powerful influence. Already seven or eight guerrilla regiments and a number of
independent platoons have been formed, and their activities make it necessary for the
Japanese to send troops after them month after month. These units hamper the Japanese
and undermine their control in the north-east, while, at the same time they inspire a
Nationalist revolution in Korea. Such activities are not merely of transient and local
importance but directly contribute to our ultimate victory.
However, there are still some weak points. For instance: National defence policy
has not been sufficiently developed; participation of the people is not general; internal
political organization is still in its primary stages, and the force used to attack the
Japanese and the puppet governments is not yet sufficient. But if present policy is
continued tenaciously, all these weaknesses will be overcome. Experience proves that
guerrilla war will develop to even greater proportions and that, in spite of the cruelty o
the Japanese and the many methods they have device to cheat the people, they cannot
extinguish guerrilla activities extinguish guerrilla activities in the three north-eastern
provinces.
The guerrilla experiences of China and of other countries that have been outlined;
prove that in a war of revolutionary nature such hostilities are possible, natural and
necessary. They prove that if the present anti-Japanese war for the emancipation of the
masses of the Chinese people is to gain ultimate victory, such hostilities must expand
tremendously.
Historical experience is written in iron and blood. We must point out that the guerrilla
campaigns being waged in China today are a page in history that has no precedent. Their
influence will not be confined solely to China in her present anti-Japanese war but will
be worldwide.

18

4 Can Victory Be Attained By
Guerrilla Operations?
Guerrilla hostilities are but one phase of the war of resistance against Japan and the
answer to the question of whether or not they can produce ultimate victory can be given
only after investigation and comparison of all elements of our own strength with those of
the enemy. The particulars of such a comparison are several. First, the strong Japanese
bandit nation is an absolute monarchy. During the course of her invasion of China, she
had made comparative progress in the techniques of industrial production and in the
development of excellence and skill in her army, navy, and airforce. But in spite of this
industrial progress, she remains an absolute monarchy of inferior physical endowments.
Her manpower, her raw materials, and her financial resources are all inadequate and
insufficient to maintain her in protracted warfare or to meet the situation presented by
a war prosecuted over a vast area. Added to this is the anti-war feeling now manifested by
the Japanese people, a feeling that is shared by the junior officers and, more extensively,
by the soldiers of the invading army. Furthermore, China is not Japan’s only enemy.
Japan is unable to employ her entire strength in the attack on China; she cannot, at
most, spare more than a million men for this purpose, as she must hold any in excess
of that number for use against other possible opponents. Because of these important
primary considerations, the invading Japanese bandits can hope neither to be victorious
in a protracted struggle nor to conquer a vast area. Their strategy must be one of
lightning war and speedy decision. If we can hold out for three or more years, it will be
most difficult for Japan to bear up under the strain.
In the war, the Japanese brigands must depend upon lines of communication linking
the principal cities as routes for the transport of war materials. The most important
considerations for her are that her rear be stable and peaceful and that her lines of
communication be intact. It is not to her an advantage to wage war over a vast area
with disrupted lines of communication. She cannot disperse her strength and fight in a
number of places, and her greatest fears are these eruptions in her rear and disruption
of her lines of communication. If she can maintain communications, she will be able at
will to concentrate powerful forces speedily at strategic points to engage our organized
units in decisive battle. Another important Japanese objective is to profit from the
industries, finances, and manpower in captured areas and with them to augment her
own insufficient strength. Certainly, it is not to her advantage to forgo these benefits,
not to be forced to dissipate her energies in a type of warfare in which the gains will not
compensate for the losses. It is for these reasons that guerrilla warfare conducted in each
bit of conquered territory over a wide area will be a heavy blow struck at the Japanese
bandits. Experience in the five northern provinces as well as in Jiangsu, Zhejiang and

19

4 Can Victory Be Attained By Guerrilla Operations?
Anhui has absolutely established the truth of this assertion.
China is a country half colonial and half feudal; it is a country that is politically,
militarily, and economically backward. This is an inescapable conclusion. It is a vast
country with great resources and tremendous population, a country in which the terrain
is complicated and the facilities for communication are poor. All theses factors favour a
protracted war, they all favour the application of mobile warfare and guerrilla operations.
The establishment of innumerable anti-Japanese bases behind the enemy’s lines will force
him to fight unceasingly in many places at once, both to his front and his rear. He thus
endlessly expends his resources.
We must unite the strength of the army with that of the people, we must strike the
weak spots in the enemy’s flanks, in his front, in his rear. We must make war everywhere
and cause dispersal of his forces and dissipation of his strength. Thus the time will come
when a gradual change will become evident in the relative position of ourselves and our
enemy, and when that day comes, it will be the beginning of our ultimate victory over
the Japanese.
Although China’s population is great, it is unorganized. This is a weakness which
must be then into account.
The Japanese bandits have merely to conquer territory but rapacious, and murderous
policy of the extinction of the Chinese race. We must unite the nation without regard to
parties and follow our policy of resistance to the end. China today is not the China of old.
It is not like Abyssinia. China today is at the point of her greatest historical progress.
The standards of literacy among the masses have been raised; the rapprochement of
Communists and Nationalists has laid the foundation for an anti-Japanese war front
that is constantly being strengthened and expanded; government, army and people are
all working with great energy; the raw material resources and the economic strength of
the nation are waiting to be used; the unorganized people are becoming an organized
nation.
These energies must be directed toward the goal of protracted war so that should the
Japanese occupy much of our territory or even most of it, we shall still gain final victory.
Not only must those behind our lines organize for resistance but also those who live in
Japanese-occupied territory in every part of the country. The traitors who accept the
Japanese as fathers are few in number, and those who have taken oath that they would
prefer death to abject slavery are many. If we resist with this spirit, what enemy can
we not conquer and who can say that ultimate victory will not be ours?
The Japanese are waging a barbaric war along uncivilized lines. For that reason,
Japanese of all classes oppose the policies of their government, as do vast international
groups. On the other hand, because China’s cause is righteous, our countrymen of all
classes and parties are united to oppose the invader; we have sympathy in many foreign
countries including even Japan itself. This is perhaps the most important reason why
Japan will lose and China will win.
The progress of the war for the emancipation of the Chinese people will be in accord
with these facts. The guerrilla war of resistance will be in accord with these facts, and
that guerrilla operations correlated with those of our regular forces will produce victory
is the conviction of the many patriots who devote their entire strength to guerrilla

20

hostilities.

21

5 Organization For Guerrilla Warfare
Four points must be considered under this subject. These are:
1. How are guerrilla bands formed?
2. How are guerrilla bands organized?
3. What are the methods of arming guerrilla bands?
4. What elements constitute a guerrilla band?
These are all questions pertaining to the organization armed guerrilla units; they are
questions which those who had no experience in guerrilla hostilities do not understand
and on which they can arrive at no sound decisions; indeed, they would not know in
what manner to begin.

How Guerrilla Units Are Originally Formed
The unit may originate in any one of the following ways:
a) From the masses of the people.
b) From regular army units temporarily detailed for the purpose.
c) From regular army units permanently detailed.
d) From the combination of a regular army unit and a unit recruited from the people.
e) From the local militia.
f) From deserters from the ranks of the enemy.
g) From former bandits and bandit groups.
In the present hostilities, no doubt, all these sources will be employed.
In the first case above, the guerrilla unit is formed from the people. This is the
fundamental type. Upon the arrival of the enemy army to oppress and slaughter the
people, their leaders call upon them to resist. They assemble the most valorous elements,
arm them with old rifles or whatever firearms they can, and thus a guerrilla unit begins.
Orders have already been issued throughout the nation that call upon the people to form
guerrilla units both for local defense and for other combat. If the local governments

23

5 Organization For Guerrilla Warfare
approve and aid such movements, they cannot fail to prosper. In some places, where the
local government is not determined or where its officers have all fled, the leaders among
the masses (relying on the sympathy of the people and their sincere desire to resist Japan
and succor the country) call upon the people to resist, and they respond. Thus, many
guerrilla units are organized. In circumstances of this kind, the duties of leadership
usually fall upon the shoulders of young students, teachers, professors, other educators,
local soldiery, professional men, artisans, and those without a fixed profession, who are
willing to exert themselves to the last drop of their blood. Recently, in Shanxi, Hebei,
Chahar, Suiyuan, Shandong, Chekiang, Anhui, Jiangsu, and other provinces, extensive
guerrilla hostilities have broken out. All these are organized and led by patriots. The
amount of such activity is the best proof of the foregoing statement. The more such
bands there are, the better will the situation be. Each district, each county, should
be able to organize a great number of guerrilla squads, which, when assembled, form a
guerrilla company.
There are those who say: ‘I am a farmer’, or, ‘I am a student’; ‘I can discuss literature
but not military arts.’ This is incorrect. There is no profound difference between the
farmer and the soldier. You must have courage. You simply leave your farms and become
soldiers. That you are farmers is of no difference, and if you have education, that is so
much the better. When you take your arms in hand, you become soldiers; when you are
organized, you become military units.
Guerrilla hostilities are the university of war, and after you have fought several times
valiantly and aggressively, you may become a leader of troops and there will be many
well-known regular soldiers who will not be your peers. Without question, the fountainhead of guerrilla warfare is in the masses of the people, who organize guerrilla units
directly from themselves.
The second type of guerrilla unit is that which is organized from small units of
the regular forces temporarily detached for the purpose. For example, since hostilities commenced, many groups have been temporarily detached from armies, divisions,
and brigades and have been assigned guerrilla duties. A regiment of the regular army
may, if circumstances warrant, be dispersed into groups for the purpose of carrying on
guerrilla operations. As an example of this, there is the Eighth Route Army, in North
China. Excluding the periods when it carries on mobile operations as an army, it is
divided into its elements and these carry on guerrilla hostilities. This type of guerrilla
unit is essential for two reasons. First, in mobile-warfare situations, the coordination of
guerrilla activities with regular operations is necessary. Second, until guerrilla hostilities
can be developed on a grand scale, there is no one to carry out guerrilla missions but
regulars. Historical experience shows us that regular army units are not able to undergo the hardships of guerrilla campaigning over long periods. The leaders of regular
units engaged in guerrilla operations must be extremely adaptable. They must study
the methods of guerrilla war. They must understand that initiative, discipline, and the
employment of stratagems are all of the utmost importance. As the guerrilla status of
regular units is but temporary, their leaders must lend all possible support to the organization of guerrilla units from among the people. These units must be so disciplined
that they hold together after the departure of the regulars.

24

The third type of unit consists of a detachment of regulars who are permanently assigned guerrilla duties. This type of small detachment does not have to be prepared to
rejoin the regular forces. Its post is somewhere in the rear of the enemy, and there it
becomes the backbone of guerrilla organization. As an example of this type of organization we may take the Wu Tai Shan district in the heart of the Hebei-Chahar-Shanxi
area. Along the borders of these provinces, units from the Eighth Route Army have
established a framework or guerrilla operations. Around these small cores, many detachments have been organized and the area of guerrilla activity greatly expanded. In
areas in which there is a possibility of cutting the enemy’s lines of supply, this system
should be used. Severing enemy, supply routes destroys his lifeline; this is one feature
that cannot be neglected. If, at the time the regular forces withdraw from a certain area,
some units left behind, these should conduct guerrilla operations in the enemy’s rear.
As an example of this, we have the guerrilla bands now continuing their independent
operations in the Shanghai-Wusong area in spite of the withdrawal of regular forces.
The fourth type of organization is the result of a merger between small regular detachments and local guerrilla units. The regular forces may dispatch a squad, a platoon,
or a company, which is placed at the disposal of the local guerrilla commander. If a
small group experienced in military and political affairs is sent, it becomes the core of
the local guerrilla unit. These several methods are all excellent, and if properly applied,
the intensity of guerrilla warfare can be extended. In the Wu Tai Shan area, each of
these methods has been used.
The fifth type mentioned above is from the local militia, from police and home guards.
In every North China province, there are now many of these groups, and they should
be formed in every locality. The government has issued mandate to the effect that the
people are not to depart from war areas. The officer in command of the county, the
commander of the peace-preservation unit, the chief of police are all required to obey
this mandate. They cannot retreat with their forces but must remain at their stations
and resist.
The sixth type of unit is that organized from troops that come over from the enemy—the Chinese ‘traitor’ troops employed by the Japanese. It is always possible to
produce disaffection in their ranks, and we must increase our propaganda efforts and foment mutinies among such troops. Immediately after mutinying, they must be received
into our ranks and organized. The concord of the leaders and the assent of the men
must be gained, and the units rebuilt politically and reorganized militarily. Once this
has been accomplished, they become successful guerrilla units. In regard to this type of
unit, it may be said that political work among them is of utmost importance.
The seventh type of guerrilla organization is that formed from bands of bandits and
brigands. This, although difficult, must be carried out with utmost vigour lest the
enemy use such bands to his own advantages. Many bandit groups pose as anti-Japanese
guerrillas, and it is only necessary to correct their political beliefs to convert them.
In spite of inescapable differences in the fundamental types of guerrilla bands, it is
possible to unite them to form a vast sea of guerrillas. The ancients said, “Tai Shan
is a great mountain because it does not scorn the merest handful of dirt; the rivers
and seas are deep because they absorb the waters of small streams.” Attention paid to

25

5 Organization For Guerrilla Warfare
the enlistment and organization of guerrillas of every type and from every source will
increase the potentialities of guerrilla action in the anti-Japanese war. This is something
that patriots will not neglect.

The Method Of Organizing Guerrilla Regimes
Many of those who decide to participate in guerrilla activities do not know the methods of
organization. For such people, as well as for students who have no knowledge of military
affairs, the matter of organization is a problem that requires solution. Even among those
who have military knowledge, there are some who know nothing of guerrilla regimes use
they are lacking in that particular type of experience. The subject of the organization of
such regimes is not confined to the organization of specific units but includes all guerrilla
activities within the area where the regime functions.
As an example of such organization, we may take a geographical area in the enemy’s
rear. This area may comprise many counties. It must be sub-divided and individual
companies or battalions formed to accord with the sub-divisions. To this ‘military area’,
a military commander and political commissioners are appointed. Under these, the necessary officers both military and political, are appointed. In the military headquarters,
there will be the staff, the aides, the supply officers, and the medical personnel. These
are controlled by the chief of staff, who acts in accordance with orders from the commander. In the political headquarters, there are bureaus of propaganda organization,
people’s mass movements, and miscellaneous affairs. Control of these is vested in the
political chairman.
The military areas are sub-divided into smaller districts in accordance with local
geography, the enemy situation locally, and the state of guerrilla development. Each
of these smaller divisions within the area is a district, each of which may consist of
from two to six counties. To each district, a military commander and several political
commissioners are appointed. Under their direction, military and political headquarters
are organized. Tasks are assigned in accordance with the number of guerrilla troops
available. Although the names of the officers in the ‘district’ correspond to those in
the larger ‘area’, the number of the functionaries assigned in the former case should be
reduced to the least possible. In order to unify control, to handle guerrilla troops that
come from different sources, and to harmonize military operations and local political
affairs, a committee of from seven to nine members should be organized in each area
and district. This committee, the members of which are selected by the troops and the
local political officers, should function as a forum for the discussion of both military and
political matters.
All the people in an area should arm themselves and be organized into two groups.
One of these groups is a combat group, the other a self-defence unit with but limited
military quality. Regular combatant guerrillas are organized into one of three general
types of units. The first of these is the small unit, the platoon or company. In each
county, three to six units may be organized. The second type is the battalion of from
two to four companies. One such unit should be organized in each county. While the

26

unit fundamentally belongs to the county in it was organized, it may operate in other
counties. While in areas other than its own, it must operate in conjunction with local
units in order to take advantage of their manpower, their knowledge of local terrain and
local customs, and their information of the enemy.
The third type is the guerrilla regiment, which consists of from two to four of the abovementioned battalion units. If sufficient manpower is available, a guerrilla a brigade of
from two to four regiments may be formed.
Each of the units has its own peculiarities of organization. A squad, the smallest unit,
has a strength of from nine to eleven men, including the leader and the assistant leader.
Its arms may be from two to five Western-style rifles, with the remaining men armed
with rifles of local manufacture, fowling-pieces, etc., spears, or big swords. Two to four
such squads form a platoon. This too has a leader and an assistant leader, and when
acting independently, it is assigned a political officer to carry on political propaganda
work. The platoon may have about ten rifles, with the remainder of its four of such units
from a company, which, like the platoon, has a leader, an assistant leader, and a political
officer. All these units are under the direct supervision of the military commanders of
the areas in which they operate.
The battalion unit must be more thoroughly organized and better equipped than the
smaller units. Its discipline and its personnel should be superior. If a battalion is formed
from company units, it should not deprive subordinate units entirely of their manpower
and their arms. If in a small area, there is a peace-preservation corps, a branch of the
militia, or police, regular guerrilla units should not be dispersed over it.
The guerrilla unit next in size to the battalion is the regiment. This must be under
more severe discipline than the battalion. In an independent guerrilla regiment, there
may be ten men per squad, three squad per platoon, three platoons per company, three
companies per battalion, and three battalions to the regiment. Two of such regiments
form a brigade. Each of these units has a commander, a vice-commander, and a political
officer.
In North China, guerrilla cavalry units should be established. These may be regiments
of from two to four companies, or battalions.
All these units from the lowest to the highest are combatant guerrilla units and receive
their supplies from the central government. Details of their organization are shown in
the tables.
All the people of both sexes from the ages of sixteen to forty-five must be organized
into anti-Japanese self-defence units, the basis of which is voluntary service. As a first
step, they must procure arms, then they must be given both military and political
training. Their responsibilities are : local sentry duties, securing information of the
enemy, arresting traitors, and preventing the dissemination of enemy propaganda. When
the enemy launches a guerrilla-suppression drive, these units, armed with what weapons
there are, are assigned to certain areas to deceive, hinder, and harass him. Thus, the
defence units assist the combatant guerrillas. They have other functions. They furnish
stretcher-bearers to transport the wounded , carriers to take food to the troops, and
comfort missions to provide the troops with tea and rice. If a locality can organize such
a self-defence unit as we have described, the traitors cannot hide nor can bandits and

27

5 Organization For Guerrilla Warfare
robbers disturb the peace of the people. Thus the people will continue to assist the
guerrilla and supply manpower to our regular armies. “The organization of self-defence
units is a transitional step in the development of universal conscription. Such units are
reservoirs of manpower for the orthodox forces.”
There have been such organizations for some time in Shanxi, Shaanxi, Henan, and
Suiyuan. The youth organizations in different provinces were formed for the purpose
of educating the young. They have been of some help. However, they were not voluntary, and confidence of the people was thus not gained. These organizations were
not widespread, and their effect was almost negligible. This system was, therefore,
supplanted by the new-type organizations,. Which are organized on the principles of
voluntary cooperation and non-separation of the members from their native localities.
When the members of these organizations are in their native towns, they support themselves. Only in case of military necessity are they ordered to remote places, and when
this is done, the government must support them. Each member of these groups must
have a weapon even if the weapon is only a knife, a pistol, a lance, or a spear.
In all places where the enemy operates, these self-defence units should organize within
themselves a small guerrilla group of perhaps from three to ten men armed with pistols
or revolvers. This group is not required to leave its native locality.
The organization of these self-defence units is mentioned in this book because such
units are useful for the purposes of inculcating the people with military and political
knowledge, keeping order in the rear, and replenishing the ranks of the regulars. These
groups should be organized not only in the active war zones but in every province in
China. “The people must be inspired to co-operate voluntarily. We must not force them,
for if we do, it will be ineffectual.” This is extremely important.
In order to control anti-Japanese military organization as a whole, it is necessary to
establish a system of military areas and districts along the lines we have indicated.

Equipment Of Guerrillas
In regard to the problem of guerrilla equipment, it must be understood that guerrillas are
lightly-armed attack groups, which require simple equipment. The standard of equipment is based upon the nature of duties assigned; the equipment of low-class guerrilla
units is not as good as that of higher-class units. For example, those who are assigned
the task of destroying rail communications are better equipped than those who do not
have that task. The equipment of guerrillas cannot be based on what the guerrillas
want, to even what they need, but must be based on what is available for their use.
Equipment cannot be furnished immediately but must be acquired gradually. These are
points to be kept in mind.
The question of equipment includes the collection, supply, distribution, and replacement of weapons, ammunition, blankets, communication materials, transport, and facilities for propaganda work. The supply of weapons and ammunition is most difficult,
particularly at the time the unit is established, but this problem can always be solved
eventually. Guerrilla bands that originate in the people are furnished with revolvers,

28

pistols, rifles, spears, big swords, and land mines and mortars of local manufacture.
Other elementary weapons are added and as many new-type rifles as are available are
distributed. After a period of resistance, it is possible to increase the supply of equipment by capturing it from the enemy. In this respect, the transport companies are the
easiest to equip, for in any successful attack, we will capture the enemy’s transport.
An armory should be established in each guerrilla district for the manufacture and
repair of rifles and for the production of cartridge, hand grenades and bayonets. Guerrillas must not depend too much on an armory. The enemy is the principal source of
their supply.
For destruction of railway tracks, bridges, and stations in enemy-controlled territory,
it is necessary to gather together demolition materials. Troops must be trained in the
preparation and use of demolitions, and a demolition unit must be organized in each
regiment.
As for minimum clothing requirements, these are that each man shall have at least two
summer-weight uniforms, one suit of winter clothing, two hats, a pair of wrap puttees1 ,
and blanket. Each man must have a haversack2 or a bag for food. In the north, each man
must have an overcoat. In acquiring this clothing, we cannot depend on captures made
by the enemy, for it is forbidden for captors to take clothing from their prisoners. In order
to maintain high morale in guerrilla forces, all the clothing and equipment mentioned
should be furnished by the representatives of the government in each guerrilla district.
These men may confiscate clothing from traitors or ask contributions from those best
able to afford them. In subordinate groups, uniforms are unnecessary.
Telephone and radio equipment is not necessary in lower groups, but all units from
regiment up are equipped with both. This material can be obtained by contributions
from the regular forces and by capture from the enemy.
In the guerrilla army in general, and at bases in particular, there must be a high
standard of medical equipment. Besides the services of the doctors, medicines must be
procured. Although guerrillas can depend on the enemy for some portion of their medical
supplies, they must, in general, depend upon contributions. If Western medicines are
not available, local medicines must be made to suffice.
The problem of transport is more vital in North China than in the south, for in the
south all that are necessary are mules and horses. Small guerrilla units need no animals,
but regiments and brigades will find them necessary. Commanders and staffs of units
from companies up should be furnished a riding animal each. At times, two officers
will have to share a horse. Officers whose duties are of minor nature do not have to be
mounted.
Propaganda materials are very important. Every large guerrilla unit should have a
printing press and a mimeograph stone. They must also have paper on which to print
propaganda leaflets and notices. They must be supplied with large brushes. In guerrilla
areas, there should be a printing press or a lead-type press.
For the purpose of printing training instructions, this material is of the greatest im1
2

RL: A legwrap, as shown on the cover of the book.
RL: A small pack with a shoulder strap.

29

5 Organization For Guerrilla Warfare
portance.
In addition to the equipment listed above, it is necessary to have field-glasses, compasses, and military maps. An accomplished guerrilla group will acquire these things.
Because of the proved importance of guerrilla hostilities in the anti-Japanese war, the
headquarters of the Nationalist Government and the commanding officers of the various
war zones should do their best to supply the guerrillas with what they actually need and
are unable to get for themselves. However, it must be repeated that guerrilla equipment
will in the main depend on the efforts of the guerrillas themselves. If they depend on
higher officers too much, the psychological effect will be to weaken the guerrilla spirit of
resistance.

Elements Of The Guerrilla Army
The term ‘element’ as used in the title to this section refers to the personnel, both officers
and men, of the guerrilla army. Since each guerrilla group fights in a protracted war, its
officers must be brave and positive men whose entire loyalty is dedicated to the cause of
emancipation of the people. An officer should have the following qualities: great powers
of endurance so that in spite of any hardship he sets an example to his men and be a
model for them; he must be able to mix easily with the people; his spirit and that of the
men must be one in strengthening the policy of resistance to the Japanese. If he wishes
to gain victories, he must study tactics. A guerrilla group with officers of this calibre
would be unbeatable. I do not mean that every guerrilla group can have, at its inception,
officers of such qualities. The officers must be men naturally endowed with good qualities
which can be developed during the course of campaigning. The most important natural
quality is that of complete loyalty to the idea of people’s emancipation. If this is present,
the others will develop; if it is not present, nothing can be done. When officers are first
selected from a group, it is this quality that should receive particular attention. The
officers in a group should be inhabitants of the locality in which the group is organized,
as this will facilitate relations between them and the local civilians. In addition, officers
so chosen would be familiar with conditions. If in any locality there are not enough men
of sufficiently high qualifications to become officers, an effort must be made to train and
educate the people so these qualities may be developed and the potential officer material
increased. There can be no disagreements between officers native to one place and those
from other localities.
A guerrilla group ought to operate on the principle that only volunteers are acceptable
for service. It is a mistake to impress people into service. As long as a person is
willing to fight, his social condition or position is no consideration, but only men who
are courageous and determined can bear the hardships of guerrilla campaigning in a
protracted war.
A soldier who habitually breaks regulations must be dismissed from the army. Vagabonds
and vicious people must not be accepted for service. The opium habit must be forbidden, and a soldier who cannot break himself of the habit should be dismissed. Victory
in guerrilla war is conditioned upon keeping the membership pure and clean.

30

It is a fact that during the war the enemy may take advantage of certain people who
are lacking in conscience and patriotism and induce them to join the guerrillas for the
purpose of betraying them. Officers must, therefore, continually educate the soldiers
and inculcate patriotism in them. This will prevent the success of traitors. The traitors
who are in the ranks must be discovered and expelled, and punishment and expulsion
meted out to those who have been influenced by them. In all such cases, the officers
should summon the soldiers and relate the facts to them, thus arousing their hatred
and detestation for traitors. This procedure will serve as well as a warning to the other
soldiers. If an officer is discovered to be a traitor, some prudence must be used in the
punishment adjudged. However, the work of eliminating traitors in the army begins
with their elimination from among the people.
Chinese soldiers who have served under puppet governments and bandits who have
been converted should be welcomed as individuals or as groups. They should be welltreated and repatriated. But care should be used during their reorientation to distinguish
those whose idea is to fight the Japanese from those who may be present for other reasons.

31

6 The Political Problems Of Guerrilla
Warfare
In Chapter 1, I mentioned the fact that guerrilla troops should have a precise conception
of the political goal of the struggle and the political organization to be used in attaining
that goal. This means that both organization and discipline of guerrilla troops must be
at a high level so that they can carry out the political activities that are the life of both
the guerrilla armies and of revolutionary warfare.
First of all, political activities depend upon the indoctrination of both military and
political leaders with the idea of anti-Japanism. Through them, the idea is transmitted
to the troops. One must not feel that he is anti-Japanese merely because he is a member
of a guerrilla unit. The anti-Japanese idea must be an ever-present conviction, and if
it is forgotten, we may succumb to the temptations of the enemy or be overcome with
discouragement. In a war of long duration, those whose conviction that the people must
be emancipated is not deep rooted are likely to become shaken in their faith or actually
revolt. Without the general education that enables everyone to understand our goal of
driving out Japanese imperialism and establishing a free and happy China, the soldiers
fight without conviction and lose their determination.
The political goal must be clearly and precisely indicated to inhabitants of guerrilla
zones and their national consciousness awakened. Hence, a concrete explanation of the
political systems used is important not only to guerrilla troops but to all those who
are concerned with the realization of our political goal. The Kuomintang has issued a
pamphlet entitled System of National Organization for War, which should be widely
distributed throughout guerrilla zones. If we lack national organization, we will lack the
essential unity that should exist between the soldiers and the people.
A study and comprehension of the political objectives of this war and of the antiJapanese front is particularly important for officers of guerrilla troops. There are some
militarists who say: “We are not interested in politics but only in the profession of arms.”
It is vital that these simple-minded militarists be made to realize the relationship that
exists between politics and military affairs. Military action is a method used to attain a
political goal. While military affairs and political affairs are not identical, it is impossible
to isolate one from the other.
It is to be hoped that the world is in the last era of strife. The vast majority of human
beings have already prepared or are preparing to fight a war that will bring justice to
the oppressed peopled of the world. No matter how long this war may last, there is no
doubt that it will be followed by an unprecedented epoch of peace The war that we are
fighting today for the freedom of all human beings, and the independent, happy, and
liberal China that we are fighting to establish will be a part of that new world order.

33

6 The Political Problems Of Guerrilla Warfare
A conception like this is difficult for the simple-minded militarist to grasp and it must
therefore be carefully explained to him.
There are three additional matters that must be considered under the broad question
of political activities. These are political activities, first, as applied to the troops; second, as applied to the people; and, third, as applied to the enemy. The fundamental
problems are: first, spiritual unification of officers and men within the army; second
spiritual unification of the army and the people; of the army and the people; and, last,
destruction of the unity of the enemy. The concrete methods for achieving these unities
are discussed in detail in pamphlet Number 4 of this series, entitled Political Activities
in Anti-Japanese Guerrilla Warfare.
A revolutionary army must have discipline that is established on a limited democratic
basis. In all armies, obedience the subordinates to their superiors must be exacted. This
is true in the case of guerrilla discipline, but the basis for guerrilla discipline must be
the individual conscience. With guerrillas, a discipline of compulsion is ineffective. In
any revolutionary army, there is unity of purpose as far as both officers and men are
concerned, and, therefore, within such an army, discipline is self-imposed. Although
discipline in guerrilla ranks is not as severe as in the ranks of orthodox forces, the
necessity for discipline exists. This must be self-imposed, because only when it is, is the
soldier able to understand completely, why he fights and why he must obey. This type
of discipline becomes a tower of strength within the army, and it is the only type that
can truly harmonize the relationship that exists between officers and soldiers.
In any system where discipline is externally imposed, the relationship that exists
between officer and man is characterized by indifference of the one to the other. The
idea that officers can physically beat or severely tongue-lash their men is a feudal one
and is not in accord with the conception of self-imposed discipline. Discipline of the
feudal type will destroy internal unity and fighting strength. A discipline self-imposed
is the primary characteristic of a democratic system in the army.
A secondary characteristic is found in the degree of liberties accorded officers and
soldiers. In a revolutionary army, all individuals enjoy political liberty and the question,
for example, of the emancipation of the people must not only be tolerated but discussed,
and propaganda must encouraged. Further, in such an army, the mode of living of the
officers and the soldiers must not differ too much, and this is particularly true in the case
of guerrilla troops. Officers should live under the same conditions as their men, for that
is the only way in which they can gain from their men the admiration and confidence
so vital in war. It is incorrect to hold to a theory of equality in all things. But there
must be equality of existence in accepting the hardships and dangers of war, thus we
may attain to the unification of the officer and soldier groups a unity both horizontal
within the group itself, and vertical, that is, from lower to higher echelons. It is only
when such unity is present that units can be said to be powerful combat factors.
There is also a unity of spirit that should exist between troops and local inhabitants.
The Eighth Route Army put into practice a code known as Three Rules and the Eight
Remarks, which we list here:
Rules:

34

1. All actions are subject to command.
2. Do not steal from the people.
3. Be neither selfish nor unjust.
Remarks
1. Replace the door when you leave the house.1
2. Roll up the bedding on which you have slept.
3. Be courteous.
4. Be honest in your transactions.
5. Return what you borrow.
6. Replace what you break.
7. Do not bathe in the presence of women.
8. Do not without authority search the pocketbooks of those you arrest.
The Red Army adhered to this code for ten years and the Eighth Route Army and
other units have since adopted it.
Many people think it impossible for guerrillas to exist for long in the enemy’s rear.
Such a belief reveals lack of comprehension of the relationship that should exist between
the people and the troops. The former may be likened to water the latter to the fish
who inhabit it. How may it be said that these two cannot exist together? It is only
undisciplined troops who make the people their enemies and who, like the fish out of its
native element cannot live.
We further our mission of destroying the enemy by propagandizing his troops, by
treating his captured soldiers with consideration, and by caring for those of his wounded
who fall into our hands. If we fail in these respects, we strengthen the solidarity of our
enemy.

1

In summer, doors were frequently lifted off and used as beds. -S.B.G, Translator.

35

7 The Strategy Of Guerrilla Resistance
Against Japan
It has been definitely decided that in the strategy of our war against Japan, guerrilla
strategy must be auxiliary to fundamental orthodox methods. If this were a small
country, guerrilla activities could be carried out close to the scene of operations of the
regular army and directly complementary to them. In such a case, there would be no
question of guerrilla strategy as such. Nor would the question arise if our country were as
strong as Russia, for example, and able speedily to eject an invader. The question exists
because China, a weak country of vast size, has today progressed to the point where it
has become possible to adopt the policy of a protracted war characterized by guerrilla
operations. Although these may at first glance seem to be abnormal or heterodox, such
is not actually the case.
Because Japanese military power is inadequate, much of the territory her armies have
overrun is without sufficient garrison troops. Under such circumstances the primary
functions of guerrillas are three: first, to conduct a war on exterior lines, that is, in the
rear of the enemy; second, to establish bases, and, last, to extend the war areas. Thus,
guerrilla participation in the war is not merely a matter of purely local guerrilla tactics
but involves strategical considerations.
Such war, with its vast time and space factors, establishes a new military process, the
focal point of which is China today. The Japanese are apparently attempting to recall
a past that saw the Yuan extinguish the Sung and the Ch’ing conquer the Ming; that
witnessed the extension of the British Empire to North America and India; that saw the
Latins overrun Central and South America. As far as China today is concerned, such
dreams of conquest are fantastic and without reality. Today’s China is better equipped
than was the China of yesterday, and a new type of guerrilla hostilities is a part of
that equipment. If our enemy fails to take these facts into consideration and makes too
optimistic an estimate of the situation, he courts disaster.
Though the strategy of guerrillas is inseparable from war strategy as a whole, the
actual conduct of these hostilities differs from the conduct of orthodox operations. Each
type of warfare has methods peculiar to itself, and methods suitable to regular warfare
cannot be applied with success to the special situations that confront guerrillas.
Before we treat the practical aspects of guerrilla war, it might be well to recall the
fundamental axiom of combat on which all military action is based. This can be stated:
“Conservation of one’s own strength; destruction of enemy strength.” A military policy
based on this axiom is consonant with a national policy directed towards the building of
a free and prosperous Chinese state and the destruction of Japanese imperialism. It is in
furtherance of this policy that government applies in military strength. Is the sacrifice

37

7 The Strategy Of Guerrilla Resistance Against Japan
demanded by war in conflict with the idea of self-preservation? Not at all. The sacrifices
demanded are necessary both to destroy the enemy and to preserve ourselves; the sacrifice
of a part of the people is necessary to preserve the whole. All the considerations of
military action are derived from this axiom. Its application is as apparent in all tactical
and strategical conceptions as it is in the simple case of the soldier who shoots at his
enemy from a covered position.
All guerrilla units start from nothing and grow. What methods should we select to
ensure the conservation and development of our own strength and the destruction of
that of the enemy? The essential requirements are the six listed below:
Retention of the initiative; alertness; carefully planned tactical attacks in a war
of strategical defence; tactical speed in a war strategically protracted, tactical
operations on exterior lines in a war conducts strategically on interior lines.
Conduct of operations to complement those of the regular army.
The establishment of bases.
A clear understanding of the relationship that exits between the attack and the
defence.
The development of mobile operations.
Correct command.
The enemy, though numerically weak, is strong in the quality of his troops and their
equipment; we, on the other hand, are strong numerically but weak as to quality. These
considerations have been taken into account in the development of the policy of tactical
offence, tactical speed, and tactical operations on exterior lines in a war that, strategically speaking, is defensive in character, protracted in nature, and conducted along
interior lines. Our strategy is based on these conceptions. They must be kept in mind
in the conduct of all operations.
Although the element of surprise is not absent in orthodox warfare, there are fewer
opportunities to apply it than there are during guerrilla hostilities. In the latter, speed is
essential. The movements of guerrilla troops must be secret and of supernatural rapidity;
the enemy must be taken unaware, and the action entered speedily. There can be no
procrastination in the execution of plans; no assumption of a negative or passive defence;
no great dispersion of forces in many local engagements. The basic method is the attack
in a violent and deceptive form.
While there may be cases where the attack will extend over a period of several days (if
that length of time in necessary to annihilate an enemy group), it is more profitable to
launch and push an attack with maximum speed. The tactics of defence have no place
in the realm of guerrilla warfare. If a delaying action is necessary, such places as defiles,
river crossings, and villages offer the most suitable conditions, for it is in such places
that the enemy’s arrangements may be disrupted and he may be annihilated.

38

The enemy is much stronger than we are, and it is true that we can hinder, distract,
disperse, and destroy him only if we disperse our own forces. Although guerrilla warfare
is the warfare of such dispersed units, it is sometimes desirable to concentrate in order
to destroy an enemy. Thus, the principle of concentration of force against a relatively
weaker enemy is applicable to guerrilla warfare.
We can prolong this struggle and make of it a protracted war only by gaining positive
and lightning-like tactical decisions; by employing our manpower in proper concentrations and dispersions; and by operation on exterior lines in order to surround and destroy
our enemy. If we cannot surround whole armies, we can at least partially destroy them,
if we cannot kill the Japanese, we can capture them. The total effect of many local successes will be to change the relative strengths of the opposing forces. The destruction
of Japan’s military power, combined with the international sympathy for China’s cause
and the revolutionary tendencies evident in Japan, will be sufficient to destroy Japanese
imperialism.
We will next discuss initiative, alertness, and the matter of careful planning. What is
meant by initiative in warfare? In all battles and wars, a struggle to gain and retain the
initiative goes on between the opposing sides, for it is the side that holds the initiative
that has liberty of action. When an army loses the initiative, it loses its liberty; its role
becomes passive; it faces the danger of defeat and destruction.
It is more difficult to obtain the initiative when defending on interior lines than it
is while attacking on exterior lines. This is what Japan is doing. There are, however,
several weak points as far as Japan is concerned. One of these is lack of sufficient
manpower for the task; another is her cruelty to the inhabitants of conquered areas; a
third is the underestimation of Chinese strength, which has resulted in the differences
between military cliques, which, in turn, have been productive of many mistakes in
the direction of her military forces. For instance, she has been gradually compelled
to increase her manpower in China while, at the same time. the many arguments
over plans of operations and disposition of troops have resulted in the loss of good
opportunities for improvement of her strategical position. This explains the fact that
although the Japanese are frequently able to surround large bodies of Chinese troops,
they have never yet been able to capture more than a few. The Japanese military
machine is thus being weakened by insufficiency of manpower, inadequacy of resources,
the barbarism of her troops, and the general stupidity that has characterized the conduct
of operations. Her offensive continues unabated, but because of the weaknesses pointed
out, her attack must be limited in extent. She can never conquer China. The day will
come — indeed already has in some areas — when she will be forced into a passive role.
When hostilities commenced, China was passive, but as we enter the second phase of
the war we find ourselves pursuing a strategy of mobile warfare, with both guerrillas and
regulars operating on exterior lines. Thus, with each passing day, we seize some degree
of initiative from the Japanese.
The matter of initiative is especially serious for guerrilla forces, who must face critical
situations unknown to regular troops. The superiority of the enemy and the lack of
unity and experience within our own ranks may be cited. Guerrillas can, however,
gain the initiative if they keep in mind the weak points of the enemy. Because of the

39

7 The Strategy Of Guerrilla Resistance Against Japan
enemy’s insufficient manpower, guerrillas can operate over vast territories, because he
is a foreigner and a barbarian, guerrillas can gain the confidence of millions of their
countrymen; because of the stupidity of enemy commanders, guerrillas can make full
use of their own cleverness. Both guerrillas and regulars must exploit these enemy
weaknesses while, at the same time, our own are remedied. Some of our weaknesses are
apparent only and are, in actuality, sources of strength. For example, the very fact that
most guerrilla groups are small makes it desirable and advantageous for them to appear
and disappear in the enemy’s rear. With such activities, the enemy is simply unable to
cope. A similar liberty of action can rarely be obtained by regular forces.
When the enemy attacks the guerrillas with more than one column, it is difficult for
the latter to retain the initiative. Any error, no matter how slight, in the estimation
of the situation is likely to result in forcing the guerrillas into a passive role. They will
then find themselves unable to beat oft the attacks of the enemy.
It is apparent that we can gain and retain the initiative only by a correct estimation
of the situation and a proper arrangement of all military and political factors. A too
pessimistic estimate will operate to force us into a passive position, with consequent loss
of initiative; an overly optimistic estimate, with its rash ordering of factors, will produce
the same result.
No military leader is endowed by heaven with an ability to seize the initiative. It is
the intelligent leader who does so after a careful study and estimate of the situation
and arrangement of the military and political factors involved. When a guerrilla unit,
through either a poor estimate on the part of its leader or pressure from the enemy,
is forced into a passive position, its first duty is to extricate itself. No method can be
prescribed for this, as the method to be employed will, in every case, depend on the
situation. One can, if necessary, run away. But there are times when the situation
seems hopeless and, in reality, is not so at all. It is at such times that the good leader
recognizes and seizes the moment when he can regain the lost initiative.
Let us revert to alertness. To conduct one’s troops with alertness is an essential of
guerrilla command. Leaders must realize that to operate alertly is the most important
factor in gaining the initiative and vital in its effect of the relative situation that exists
between our forces and those of the enemy. Guerrilla commanders adjust their operations
to the enemy situation, to the terrain, and to prevailing local conditions. Leaders must
be alert to sense changes in these factors and make necessary modifications in troop
dispositions to accord with them. The leader must be like a fisherman, who, with his
nets, is able both to cast them and to pull them out in awareness of the depth of
the water, the strength of the current or the presence of any obstructions that may
foul them. As the fisherman controls his nets through the lead ropes, so the guerrilla
leader maintains contact with control over his units. As the fisherman must change his
position, so must the guerrilla commander. Dispersion, concentration, constant change
of position—it is in these ways that guerrillas employ their strength.
In general, guerrilla units disperse to operate:
1. When the enemy is in over-extended defence, and sufficient force cannot be concentrated against him, guerrillas must disperse, harass him, and demoralize him.

40

2. When encircled by the enemy, guerrillas disperse to withdraw.
3. When the nature of the ground limits action, guerrillas disperse.
4. When the availability of supplies limits action, they disperse.
5. Guerrillas disperse in order to promote mass movements over a wide area.
Regardless of the circumstances that prevail at the time of dispersal, caution must be
exercised in certain matters:
1. A relatively large group should be retained as a central force. The remainder of
the troops should not be divided into groups of absolutely equal size. In this way,
the leader is in a position to deal with any circumstances that may arise.
2. Each dispersed unit should have clear and definite responsibilities. Orders should
specify a place to which to proceed, the time of proceeding, and the place, time,
and method of assembly.
Guerrillas concentrate when the enemy is advancing upon them, and there is opportunity to fall upon him and destroy him. Concentration may be desirable when the enemy
is on the defensive and guerrillas wish to destroy isolated detachments in particular localities. By the term ‘concentrate’, we do not mean the assembly of all manpower but
rather of only that necessary for the task. The remaining guerrillas are assigned missions
of hindering and delaying the enemy, of destroys isolated groups, or of conducting mass
propaganda.
In addition to the dispersion and concentration of forces, the leader must understand
what is termed ‘alert shifting’. When the enemy feels the danger of guerrillas, he will
generally send troops out to attack them. The guerrillas must consider the situation and
decide at what time and at what place they wish to fight. If they find that they cannot
fight, they must immediately shift. Then the enemy may be destroyed piecemeal. For
example; after a guerrilla group has destroyed an enemy detachment at one place, it
may be shifted to another area to attack and destroy a second detachment. Sometimes,
it will not be profitable for a unit to become engaged in a certain area, and in that case,
it must move immediately.
When the situation is serious, the guerrilla must move with the fluidity of water and
the ease of the blowing wind. Their tactics must deceive, tempt, and confuse the enemy.
They must lead the enemy to believe that they will attack him from the east and north,
and they must then strike him from the west and the south. They must strike, then
rapidly disperse. They must move at night.
Guerrilla initiative is expressed in dispersion, concentration, and the alert shifting of
forces. If guerrillas are stupid and obstinate, they will be led to passive positions and
severely damaged. Skill in conducting guerrilla operations, however, lies not in merely
understanding the things we have discussed but rather in their actual application on
the field of battle. The quick intelligence that constantly watches the ever-changing

41

7 The Strategy Of Guerrilla Resistance Against Japan
situation and is able to seize on the right moment for decisive action is found only in
keen and thoughtful observers.
Careful planning is necessary if victory is to be won in guerrilla war, and those who
fight without method do not understand the nature of guerrilla action. A plan is necessary regardless of the size of the unit involved; a prudent plan is as necessary in the case
of the squad as in the case of the regiment. The situation must be carefully studied,
then an assignment of duties made. Plans must include both political and military instruction; the matter of supply and equipment, and the matter of cooperation with local
civilians. Without study of these factors, it is impossible either to seize the initiative or
to operate alertly. It is true that guerrillas can make only limited plans, but even so,
the factors we have mentioned must be considered.
The initiative can be secured and retained only following a positive victory that results
from attack. The attack must be made on guerrilla initiative; that is, guerrillas must not
permit themselves to be maneuvered into a position where they are robbed of initiative
and where the decision to attack is forced upon them. Any victory will result from careful
planning and alert control. Even in defence, all our efforts must be directed toward a
resumption of the attack, for it is only by attack that we can extinguish our enemies an
preserve ourselves. A defence or a withdrawal is entirely useless as far as extinguishing
our enemies is concerned and of only temporary value. as far as the conservation of our
forces is concerned. This principle is valid both for guerrillas and regular troops. The
differences are of degree only; that is to say, in the manner of execution.
The relationship that exists between guerrilla and the orthodox forces is important
and must be appreciated. Generally speaking, there are types of cooperation between
guerrillas and orthodox groups. These are:
1. Strategical cooperation.
2. Tactical cooperation.
3. Battle cooperation.
Guerrillas who harass the enemy’s rear installations and hinder his transport are
weakening him and encouraging the national spirit of resistance. They are co-operating
strategically. For example, the guerrillas in Manchuria had no functions of strategical
cooperation with orthodox forces until the war in China started. Since that time, their
faction of strategical co-operation is evident, for if they can kill one enemy, make the
enemy expend one round of ammunition, or hinder one enemy group in its advance
southward, our powers of resistance here are proportionately increased. Such guerrilla
action has a positive action on the enemy nation and on its troops, while, at the same
time, it encourages our own countrymen. Another example of strategical co-operation
is furnished by the guerrillas who operate along the P’ing-Sui, P’ing-Han, Chin-P’u,
T’ung-Pu, and Cheng-T’ai railways. This co-operation began when the invader attacked, continued during the period when he held garrisoned cities in the areas, and
was intensified when our regular forces counter-attacked, in an effort to restore the lost
territories.

42

As an example of tactical cooperation, we may cite the operations at Hsing-K’ou,
when guerrillas both north and south of Yeh Men destroyed the T’ung-P’u railway and
the motor roads near P’ing Hosing Pass and Yang Fang K’ou. A number of small operating base were established, and organized guerrilla action in Shanxi complemented the
activities of the regular forces both there and in the defence of Honan. similarly, during
the south Shandong campaign, guerrillas in the five northern provinces co-operated with
the army’s operation on the Hsuchow front.
Guerrilla commanders in rear areas and those in command of regiments assigned to
operate with orthodox units must co-operate in accordance with the situation. It is their
function to determine weak points in the enemy dispositions, harass them, to disrupt
their transport, and to undermine their morale, If guerrilla action were independent, the
results to be obtained from tactical cooperation would be lost and those that result from
strategical co-operation greatly diminished. In order to accomplish their mission and
improve the degree of co-operation, guerrilla units must be equipped with some means
of rapid communication. For this purpose, two way radio sets are recommended.
Guerrilla forces in the immediate battle area are responsible for close cooperation
with regular forces, Their principal functions are to hinder enemy transport to gather
information, and to act as outposts and sentinels. Even without precise instructions
from the commander of the regular forces, these missions, as well as any others that
contribute to the general success, should be assumed.
The problem of establishment of bases is of particular importance. This is so because
this war is a cruel and protracted struggle. The lost territories can be restored only by
a strategical counter-attack and this we cannot carry out until the enemy is well into
China. Consequently, some part of our country — or, indeed, most of it — may be
captured by the enemy and become his rear area. It is our task to develop intensive
guerrilla warfare over this vast area and convert the enemy’s rear into an additional front.
Thus the enemy will never be able to stop fighting. In order to subdue the occupied
territory, the enemy will have to become increasingly severe and oppressive.
A guerrilla base may be defined as an area, strategically located, in which the guerrillas
can carry out their duties of training, self-preservation and development. Ability to fight
a war without a rear area is a fundamental characteristic of guerrilla action, but this
does not mean that guerrilla can exist and function over a long period of time without
the development of base areas. History shows us many example of peasant revolts
that were unsuccessful, and it is fanciful to believe that such movements, characterized
by banditry and brigandage, could succeed in this era of improved communications and
military equipment. Some guerrilla leaders seem to think that those qualities are present
in today’s movement, and before such leaders can comprehend the importance of base
areas in the long-term war, their mind must be disabused of this idea.
The subject of bases may be better understood if we consider:
1. The various categories of bases.
2. Guerrilla areas and base areas.
3. The establishment of bases.

43

7 The Strategy Of Guerrilla Resistance Against Japan
4. The development of bases.
Guerrilla bases may be classified according to their location as: first, mountain bases;
second, plains bases; and last, river, lake, and bay bases. The advantages of bases in
mountainous areas are evident. Those which are now established are at Ch’ang P’o
Chan, Wu Tai Shan, Taiheng Shan, Tai Shan, Yen Shan, and Mao Shan. These bases
are strongly protected. Similar bases should be established in all enemy rear areas.
Plains country is generally not satisfactory for guerrilla operating bases, but this does
not mean that guerrilla warfare cannot flourish in such country or that bases cannot
be established there. The extent of guerrilla development in Hebei and west Shandong
proves the opposite to be the case Whether we can count on the use of these bases
over long periods of time is questionable. We can, however, establish small bases of
a seasonal or temporary nature. This we can do because our barbaric enemy simply
does not have the manpower to occupy all the areas he has overrun and because the
population of China is so numerous that a base can established anywhere. Seasonal bases
in plains country may be established in the winter when the rivers are frozen over, and
in the summer when the crops are growing. Temporary bases may be established when
the enemy is otherwise occupied. When the enemy advances, the guerrillas who have
established bases in the plains area are the first to engage him. Upon their withdrawal
into mountainous country, they should leave behind them guerrilla groups dispersed over
the entire area. Guerrillas shift from base to base on the theory that they must be in
one place one day and another place the next.
There are many historical examples of the establishment of bases in river, bay, and lake
country, and this is one aspect of our activity that has so far received little attention. Red
guerrillas held out for many years in the Hungtze Lake region. We should establish bases
in the Hungtze and Tai areas and along rivers and watercourses in territory controlled
by the enemy so as to deny him access to, and free use of, the water routes.
There is a difference between the terms base area and guerrilla area. An area completely surrounded by territory occupied by the enemy is a ‘base area’. Wu Tai Shan, and
Taiheng Shan are examples of base areas. On the other hand, the area east and north
of Wu Tai Shan (the Shanxi-Hebei-Chahar border zone) is a guerrilla area. Such areas
can be controlled by guerrillas only while they actually physically occupy them. Upon
their departure, control reverts to a puppet pro-Japanese government. East Hopeh. for
example, was at first a guerrilla area rather than a base area. A puppet government
functioned there. Eventually, the people, organized and inspired by guerrillas from the
Wu Tai mountains, assisted in the transformation of this guerrilla area into a real base
area. Such a task is extremely difficult, for it is largely dependent upon the degree to
which the people can be inspired. In certain garrisoned areas, such as the cities and
zones contiguous to the railways, the guerrillas see unable to drive the Japanese and
puppets out. These areas remain guerrilla areas. At other times, base areas might
become guerrilla areas due either to our own mistakes or to the activities of the enemy.
Obviously, in any given area in the war zone, any one or three situations may develop:
The area may remain in Chinese hands; it may be lost to the Japanese and puppets or
it may be divided between the combatants. Guerrilla leaders should endeavour to see

44

that either the first or the last of these situations is assured.
Another point essential in the establishment of bases is the cooperation that must
exist between the armed guerrilla bands and the people. All our strength must be used
to spread the doctrine of armed resistance to Japan, to arm the people, to organize
self-defence units, and to train guerrilla bands. This doctrine must be spread among
the people, who must be organized into anti-Japanese groups. Their political instincts
must be sharpened and their martial ardour increased. If the workers, the farmers, the
lovers of liberty, the young men, the women, and the children are not organized, they
will never realize their own anti-Japanese power. Only the united strength of the people
can eliminate traitors, recover the measure of political power that has been lost, and
conserve and improve what we still retain.
We have already touched on geographic factors in our discussion of bases, and we
must also mention the economic aspects of the problem. What economic policy should
be adopted? Any such policy must offer reasonable protection to commerce and business. We interpret ‘reasonable protection’ to mean the people must contribute money in
proportion to the money they have. Farmers will be required to furnish a certain share
of their crops to guerrilla troops. Confiscation, except in the case of business run by
traitors, is prohibited.
Our activities must be extended over the entire periphery of the base area if we
wish to attack the enemy’s bases and thus strengthen and develop our own. This will
afford us opportunity to organize, equip, and train the people, thus furthering guerrilla
policy as well as the national policy of protected war. At times, we must emphasize the
development and extension of base areas; at other times, the organization, training, or
equipment of the people.
Each guerrilla base will have its own peculiar problems of attack and defence. In
general, the enemy, in an endeavour to consolidate his gains, will attempt to extinguish
guerrilla bases by dispatching numerous bodies of troops over a number of different
routes. This must be anticipated and the encirclement broken by counter-attacks As
such enemy columns are without reserves, we should plan on using our main forces to
attack one of them by surprise and devote our secondary effort to continual hindrance
and harassment. At the same time, other forces should isolate enemy garrison troops
and operate on their lines of supply and communication. When one column has been
disposed of, we may turn our attention to one of the others. In a base area as large as
Wu Tai Shan, for example, there are four or five military sub-divisions. Guerrillas in
these sub-divisions must co-operate to form a primary force to counterattack the enemy,
or the area from which he came, while a secondary force harasses and hinders him.
After defeating the enemy in any area, we must take advantage of the period he
requires for reorganization to press home our attacks. we must not attack an objective
we are not certain of winning. We must confine our operations to relatively small areas
and destroy the enemy and traitors in those places.
When the inhabitants have been inspired, new volunteers accepted trained, equipped,
and organized, our operations may be extended to include cities and lines of communication not strongly held. We may hold these at least for temporary (if not for permanent)
periods. All these are our duties in offensive strategy. Their object is to lengthen the

45

7 The Strategy Of Guerrilla Resistance Against Japan
period that the enemy must remain on the defensive. Then our military activities and
our organization work among the masses of the people must be zealously expanded; and
with equal zeal, the strength of the enemy attacked and diminished. It is of great importance that guerrilla units be rested and instructed. During such times as the enemy
is on the defensive, the troops may get some rest and instruction may be carried out.
The development of mobile warfare is not only possible but essential. This is the case
because our current war is a desperate and protracted struggle. If China were able to
conquer the Japanese bandits speedily and to recover her lost territories, there would
there would be no question of long-term war on a national scale. Hence there would
no question of the relation of guerrilla hostilities into mobile warfare of an orthodox
nature, both the quantity and quality of guerrilla must be improved. Primarily, more
men must join the armies; then the quality of equipment and standards of training
must be improved. Political training must be emphasized and our organization, the
technique of handling our weapons, our tactics — all must be improved. Our internal
discipline must be strengthened. The soldiers must be educated politically. There must
be a gradual change from guerrilla formations to orthodox regimental organization. The
necessary bureaus and staffs, both political and military, must be provided. At the same
time, attention must be paid to the creation of suitable supply, medical, and hygiene
units. The standards of equipment must be raised and types of weapons increased.
Communication equipment must not be forgotten. Orthodox standards of discipline
must be established.
Because guerrilla formations act independently and because they are the most elementary of armed formations, command cannot be too highly centralized. If it were, guerrilla
action would be too limited in scope. At the same time, guerrilla activities, to be most
effective, must be coordinated, not only in so far as they themselves are concerned, but
additionally with regular troops operating in the same areas. This coordination is a
function of the war zone commander and his staff.
In guerrilla base areas, the command must be centralized for strategical purposes and
decentralized for tactical purposes. Centralized strategical command takes care of the
general management of all guerrilla units, their coordination within war zones, and the
general policy regarding guerrilla base areas. Beyond this, centralization of command
will result in interference with subordinate units, as, naturally, the tactics to apply
to concrete situations can be determined only as these various situations arise. This
is true in orthodox warfare when communications between lower and higher echelons
break down. In a word, proper guerrilla policy will provide for unified strategy and
independent activity.
Each guerrilla area is divided into districts and these in turn are divided into subdistricts. Each sub-division has its appointed commander, and while general plans are
made by higher commanders, the nature of actions is determined by inferior commanders.
The former may suggest the nature of the action to be taken but cannot define it. Thus
inferior groups heave more or less complete local control.

46

8 Appendix
Notes
1. Each squad consists of from 9 to 11 men. In case men or arms are not sufficient,
the third platoon may be dispensed with or one squad organized as company
headquarters.

2. The mobile propaganda unit consists of members of the Company who are not
relieved of primary duties except to carry out propaganda when they are not
fighting.

3. If there is insufficient personnel, the medical section is not separately organized.
If there are only two or three medical personnel, they may be attached to the
administrative section.

4. If there is no barber, it is unimportant. If there is an insufficient number of cooks,
any member of the company may be designated to prepare food.

5. Each combatant soldier should be armed with the rifle. If there are not enough
rifles, each squad should have two or three. Shotguns, lances, and big swords
can also be furnished. The distribution of rifles does not have to be equalized in
platoons. As different missions are assigned to platoons, it may be necessary to
give one platoon more riffles than the others.

6. The strength of a company should at the most be 180, divided into 12 squads of
11 men each. The minimum strength of a company should be 82 men, divided into
6 squads of 9 men each.

47

8 Appendix

Table 1
Organization Of An Independent Guerrilla Company
Company Commander

Political Officer
Executive Officer

Mobile Propaganda Unit

Company Headquarters
Message Section
Administrative Section
First-Aid and Hospital Section
Intelligence Section

First Platoon

Second Platoon

Third Platoon

Squad

Squad

Squad

48

Table of Organization, Guerrilla Company
RANK
Company Leader
Political Officer
Executive Officer
Company Headquarters
Message Section Chief
Signal
Administrative Section Chief
Public Relations
Duty Personnel
Barber
Cooks
Medical Section Chief
Assistant
First Aid and Nursing
Intelligence Section Chief
Intelligence
Platoon Leaders
Squad Leaders
Nine Squads (8 each)
Total

PERSONNEL
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
2
1
10
1
1
4
1
9
3
9
72
122

ARM
Pistol
Pistol
Pistol

Rifle
Rifle

Rifle
Rifle
Rifle
Rifle
Rifle
3 Pistols
98 Rifles

49

8 Appendix

Table 2
Organization of an Independent Guerrilla Battalion

50

Notes
1. Total headquarters of an independent guerrilla battalion may vary from a minimum
of 46 to a maximum of 110.
2. When there are 4 companies to a battalion, regimental organization should be
used.
3. Machine-gun squads may be heavy or light. A light machine-gun squad has from
5 to 7 men. A heavy machine-gun squad has from 7 to 9 men.
4. The intelligence section is organized in from 2 to 4 squads, at least one of which
is made up of plain-clothed men. If horses are available, one squad should be
mounted.
5. If no men are available for stretcher-bearers, omit them and use the cooks or ask
aid from the people.
6. Each company must have at least 25 rifles. The remaining weapons may be fowling
-pieces, etc., big swords, or locally made shotguns.

51

8 Appendix

Table 3
Organization of an Independent Guerrilla Regiment

Notes
1. See Tables 1 and 2 for company and battalion organization.
2. Battalions and companies have no transport sections.
3. The hand weapon may be either revolver or pistol. Of these, each battalion should
have more than 100.

52

RANK
Regimental Commander
Political Officer
Chief of Staff
Operations Section
Operations Officer
Clerks
Intelligence Section
Intelligence Officer
Personnel
Public-Relations Section
Public-Relations Officer
Personnel
Administrative Section
Administrative Officer
Clerks
Runner
Transport Section
Chief of Section
Finance
Traffic Manager
Supply
Drivers
Medical Section
Chief of Section
Doctors
Nurses
Total, Regimental Headquarters

PERSONNEL
1
1
1

ARM
Pistol
Pistol
Pistol

1
15

Pistol

1
36

Pistol
Pistols

1
36

Pistol
Carbines

1
15
1

Pistol
Pistol

1
1
1
1
5

Pistol

Three Battalions (441 each)

1323

Total

1460

1
2
15
137

Pistol

60 Pistols
36 Carbines
124 Pistols
900 Rifles
184 Pistols
936 Rifles

53

8 Appendix

Table of Organization, Guerrilla Battalion (Independent)
RANK
Battalion Commander
Political Officer
Executive Officer
Battalion Headquarters
Signal Section
Administrative Section
Section Chief
Runner
Public Relations
Duty Personnel
Barbers
Supply
Cooks
Medical Section
Medical Officer
Stretcher-bearers
Nursing
Intelligence Section
Section Chief
Intelligence
Machine-Gun Section
Total, Headquarters

PERSONNEL
1
1
1

Three Companies (122 each)

366

Total

441

54

ARM
Pistol
Pistol
Pistol

2
1
1
10
2
3
1
10

Rifle
Rifle
Rifle

1
6
4
1
30
As Available
75

Pistol
Pistol
As Available
34 Pistols
12 Carbines
9 Pistols
288 Carbines
43 Pistols
300 Rifles

Table 4
Organization of Independent Guerrilla Brigade (or Division)

55

