Neohelicon (2016) 43:45–57
DOI 10.1007/s11059-016-0329-x

‘‘Serve the People’’ from 1944 to 2005
Jinghui Wang1

Published online: 5 July 2016
 Akadémiai Kiadó, Budapest, Hungary 2016

Abstract In 1944 Mao Zedong published a speech titled ‘‘Serve the People’’ to
commemorate the death of an Eighth Route Army Soldier, Zhang Side, a participant
in the Long March who died in the collapse of a kiln. The notion ‘‘Serve the People’’
is regarded as one of Mao’s most significant theoretical contributions to the
understanding and application of Marxism in China. In the post-Mao era, ‘‘Serve the
People’’ developed into one of the key words and slogans of the Communist Party in
China and has significant influence both domestically and internationally. While in
2005, Yan Lianke, one of China’s foremost contemporary novelists, published a
novella of the same title featuring another PLA soldier, Wu Dawang, a model
soldier selected to work as a household servant for a powerful Division Commander.
The political speech and the fiction have a strong interrelationship as the meaning of
‘‘serving the people’’ undergoes dramatic changes. By borrowing and transforming
the meaning of this well-known phrase, Yan metaphorically reveals his objection to
political injustice in China. This essay aims to compare and contrast these two
pieces, centering on the analysis of the issues: ‘‘Who are ‘the people’?’’ so as to
reveal Yan’s metaphoric writing strategy. The ultimate purpose of this essay is to
search for further understanding of justice in a global sense. Though the novella is
written in a Chinese context, its implication and significance goes beyond any
particular political regime.
Keywords Yan Lianke  Intertexuality  Justice  Fear

& Jinghui Wang
jh.wang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Department of Foreign Languages and Literatures, Tsinghua University, 1 Tsinghua Yuan,
Haidian District, Beijing 100084, People’s Republic of China

123

46

J. Wang

Introduction
Since the poststructuralist Julia Kristeva introduced the term ‘‘intertextuality’’ in
1966, it has been widely applied to interpret the literary formation of texts that have
interrelationship between each other. ‘‘By bracketting the question of semantic
sequences, one can bring out the logical practice organizing them, thus proceeding
at a suprasegmental level.’’ (Kristeva 1980, p.37) The meaning of the text is not
transferred directly from writers to readers but instead, it is mediated through other
texts. Whether it is called allusion, calque, pastiche or parody, it adequately explains
how a writer’s intentional or unintentional borrowing and transformation of a prior
text add further layers of depth to a newly generated text. And Yan Lianke’s Serve
the People is a typical example which shows how he uses this literary discourse to
link a novella1 with reference to a political slogan which was widely promoted in
the past and is still in use nowadays in China. French theorist Gérard Genette also
coined a similar term ‘‘Hypertextuality’’ which ‘‘refers to any relationship uniting a
text B (which I shall call the hypertext) to an earlier text A (I shall, of course, call it
the hypotext), upon which it is grafted in a manner that is not that of commentary.’’2
Thus it is argued that the intertexuality about ‘‘serve the people’’ here relies on the
reader’s full comprehension of its prior hypotext, so as to achieve the further
comprehension of the hypertext.

Serve the people: the hypotext
‘‘Serve the People’’ is a political slogan which was paid attention to in Mao-era
China from a same-titled speech by Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung), delivered on
September 8, 1944. Mao wrote this speech to commemorate the death of Zhang
Side, an Eighth Route Army Soldier who participated in the Long March and died in
the collapse of a kiln. In this speech Mao made a reference to a phrase by the
historian Sima Qian in the Han Dynasty, ‘‘Though death befalls all men alike, it
may be heavy as Mount Tai or light as a feather.’’3 And he continued: ‘‘To die for
the people is weightier than Mount Tai, but to work for the fascists and die for the
exploiters and oppressors is lighter than a feather. Comrade Zhang Side died for the
people, and his death is indeed weightier than Mount Tai.’’4 Because the phrase
‘‘serve the people’’ is the title of the speech, it attracted much attention and was
regarded as the origin of this notion by Mao. In fact, before the speech, the notion of
serving the people has been emphasized many times by Mao. He believes that
Marxism is a theoretical doctrine to guide the struggle for Chinese people’s
interests, rather than for the individual’s personal gain. As early as January 28,
1

The first Chinese version of ‘‘Serve the People’’ was published in 2005 in Hua Cheng, a leading
Chinese literary journal and then the government ordered the issue recalled. However the citation of
sentences out of this fiction is based on the English version of the fiction translated by Julia Lovell.

2

Genette (1997, p. 5).

3

Mao (1966, p. 3).

4

Ibid.

123

‘‘Serve the People’’ from 1944 to 2005

47

1921, Mao expressed his understanding about this notion in a letter: ‘‘I believe that
we have dispute on doctrines, which is not personal dispute. The dispute on
doctrines is obligatory, as it’s for people’s doctrine, not for personal matters.’’5 Mao
has realized that to emphasize the interests of the masses of people, or to serve the
people is a necessity, and it turns out that the victory of the Communist Party over
Guomindang (Nationalists) is the former’s relying on the masses, or to put it in
another way, serving the people is the key factor that results in the Communist
Party’s wresting the political power over the nation from Guomingdang. After the
release of the speech ‘‘Serve the People’’ in 1944, this phrase was repeatedly used
on different occasions first by Mao himself and gradually became the key phrase
and political token of the Chinese Communist Party.
The following excerpts are chosen and presented in a chronological order to
review how ‘‘Serve the People’’ develops into Chinese Communist Party’s political
token as well as Mao’s catchphrase. On December 15, 1944, 3 months after the
release of the speech ‘‘Serve the People’’, in the essay titled ‘‘Task of 1945’’, Mao
said: ‘‘all our cadres, regardless of rank, are servants of the people. All that we have
done, is to serve the people, and then is there any bad thing that we are not willing to
throw away?’’6 On April 24, 1945, at the Seventh CCP Congress, Mao further
proposed a tenet of ‘‘serving the people wholeheartedly’’ in a report titled ‘‘On
Coalition Government’’: ‘‘serve the people wholeheartedly, at no moment isolate
from masses and always start from people’s interests, instead of from certain
personal or factions’ interests. It is our starting point to be consistent in being
responsible both for people and for the Party’s leading organ.’’7 From this point on,
‘‘serving the people’’ became the guiding principle of the whole CCP. On August
13, 1945, in the essay titled ‘‘The Current Political Situation after the Victory and
Our Policy,’’ Mao emphasized: ‘‘our responsibility is to be accountable to the
people. Every word, every action, every policy should suit the interests of the
people. If there is any error, it should be corrected, and this is being accountable to
the people.’’8 On February 27, 1957, in the essay titled ‘‘On Handling of
Contradictions among the People Correctly’’, Mao said: ‘‘the government organs
carry out democratic centralism and the staff in government organs must serve the
people.’’9And 1 month later, Mao said in another article titled ‘‘Insisting on Hard
Work, Stay Close With the Masses’’ that ‘‘the Communist Party is to struggle, and
to serve the people wholeheartedly, not half-hearted or two-thirds of heart twothirds of soul.’’10 He understands the power of the people, and said in the 1960s,
Power comes from the people. If people’s requests are not reflected, there is no
use. We should learn the knowledge from the people, lay down policies, and
then educate the masses. So if one wants to be a teacher, he must be a student
5

Mao (2003, p. 14).

6

Mao (1996, Volume 3, p. 243).

7

Mao (1991, Volume 3, pp. 1094–1095).

8

Mao (1991, Volume 4, p. 1128).

9

Mao (1999a, b, Volume 7, p. 240).

10

Mao (1999a, b, Volume 7, p. 285).

123

48

J. Wang

first, and there is no teacher who has not been a student before. What’s more,
even after becoming a teacher, one should also learn from the people, and
know about students’ situation.’’11
He further summarized Marxism for the Party members: ‘‘Among our cadres,
many are self-righteous. One of the reasons is that they do not understand the
epistemology of Marxism. Therefore, it is of crucial importance to repeatedly
advocate this kind of epistemology to them. And to put it in a simple way, it is to
come from the masses and to go back into the masses.’’12
On different occasions Mao wrote the calligraphy of ‘‘serving the people’’ for
different sorts of people and groups, such as various sorts of schools, Communist
Party and government officials, the martyrs and their families, and staff members
serving him such as nurses and guards.
Looking back on Mao’s life, though he has not carried out a theoretical research
of Marxism formally in any educational institutions, as an astute politician and book
lover, he was able to combine Marxism with his dynamic understanding of the
situations and then quickly summarized it into one fundamental truth that the
Communist Party must serve the people or the masses so as to get their support. So
he emphasized that the Chinese Communist Party should always be selfless, always
serve the people heart and soul and always adhere to the principle of being peopleoriented.
The concept of ‘‘Serving the People’’, together with ‘‘Seeking Truth from Facts’’
became the core principles of CCP. And these two catchphrases are still carved on
the front and back of a huge stone right behind the front gate in the Central Party
School of the CCP, which carries the original autograph of Mao. And many scholars
in China believe that ‘‘serve the people’’ is the core of Maoism.
Moreover, the phrase is still used in the ceremony of China’s People’s Liberation
Army’s troop inspection. During the inspection of troops, the following 4 sentences
are always spoken for certain. Sentence 1 is uttered by the Inspecting official:
‘‘Greetings, Comrades!’’ Sentence 2 by the troops: ‘‘Greetings, Leader!’’ Sentence 3
by the Inspecting official: ‘‘Comrades [you] have worked hard.’’ And the troops
reply with sentence 4: ‘‘Serve the people!’’ The implication of the last sentence is
that those soldiers are willing to work hard for the interests of the people.
‘‘Serve the People’’ is not only the tenet of Maoism and leading principle of CCP
and PLA, for besides its popularity in China, the slogan ‘‘Serve the People’’ was
also once widely used in the United States by students and youth during their
political movement of the late 1960s and 1970s due to the strong Maoist influence
on the New Left. The slogan was very popular amongst the Red Guard Party, the
Black Panther Party, and the Yellow Brotherhood of West Los Angeles. Now at
City of Santa Ana, California, there is a non-profit charity organization which also
names itself ‘‘Serve the people’’ and they give people free pantry bag and free legal
aid. The significance of ‘‘Serving the people’’ the phrase itself lies in the love and

11

Mao (1999a, b, Volume 8, p. 324).

12

Ibid.

123

‘‘Serve the People’’ from 1944 to 2005

49

responsibility that a noble person could possess and spread in a society and the
justice that was strived for by all people.

Serve the People: the hypertext
One citation of Mao’s words is of particular significance to this essay. On the 21st of
September, 1966, Mao pointed out that ‘‘[E]ach of us Communist Party member
should consider the masses: the leading officers in the military troops should
consider the soldiers, the leading officials in the organizations and colleges should
consider the canteen staff and the orderlies.’’Here the ‘‘soldiers’’ and ‘‘orderlies’’ are
clearly stated to be members of ‘‘people’’, and should be served. But ironically, in
the fiction Serve the People, the orderly Wu Dawang, is not served, instead he is told
that ‘‘serve the people’’ is to ‘‘serve the Division Commander and his wife’’ by his
Political Instructor.
There are usually two ways for the author to make allusions to a hypotext: one is
the implied way, in which the author does not state directly the connection between
the hypotext and the hypertext, and challenges readers to probe the unspoken
intertexuality between the texts by themselves; the other is the direct way, in which
the author intentionally and openly links the two texts together. Obviously, in the
fiction Serve the People the author Yan Lianke applies the latter way. He not only
repeats the title in his fiction, at the beginning of his novella, he also makes use of
the following citation from Mao’s 1944 speech as the prologue13:
We hail from all corners of our country and have gathered here with one
common revolutionary objective in mind. The vast majority of people need to
come with us on the road to this objective. … In difficult times our comrades
must not lose sight of our successes, they must recognize our bright future, and
must pluck up their courage. …Our officers must be mindful of every soldier,
and every member of every revolutionary battalion must look after each other,
and must love and help each other.14
The nobleness of this sublime statement which has been and is still highly referred
to in promoting the honorable responsibility of the communist party is subverted by
Yan Lianke in such an ironic way, that the sense of deconstruction becomes
obvious. The following section will analyze his process of deconstruction and
construction step by step.
Because the 28-year-old model soldier, Wu Dawang could perfectly recite Mao’s
writings and was good at preparing various courses of food, he is sent to the house
of the Division Commander and works as an orderly. As what is mentioned in the
previous section, in the military inspection, when soldiers in the troops reply to the
praise of the inspecting official’s comment: ‘‘You have worked hard’’ with ‘‘serve
the people.’’ The underlying rationale is that they deem it a meaningful and
13
In the English version, the whole section of Mao Zedong’s speech is put at the end of the book as an
attachment.
14

Yan (2007, pp. 227–228).

123

50

J. Wang

honorable thing, because their hard work will indirectly serve the people. Wu
Dawang takes his orderly job happily with the same sort of reasoning, believing that
he is serving the people through serving the Division Commander and his wife, for
the Division Commander is trying his best to serve other people. Unfortunately with
the development of the plots, readers would find that there is a possibility that the
phrase could be misused, and the implication could be changed.
In the beginning of the fiction Wu Dawang joyfully accepts this new role,
because on the one hand it is an honor to serve the Division Commander, on the
other hand because he strives for promotion and dreams of bringing his family
members City Hukou15 through fulfilling this duty. At that time in China, there was
tremendous difference between being a city dweller and a peasant. Getting
promotion onto a certain rank in the army is the only way for him to break this
entrenchment of social strata, and get himself and his family members a chance for a
better life. So Wu Dawang’s rationale should be serving the people and getting
promotion together with City Hukou.
The fiction develops around a wooden sign that bears the Chinese characters of
‘‘Serve the People!’’ which was brought back by the Division Commander himself
and put on the kitchen table. According to the description ‘‘This sign, its letters
burning scarlet against the whitewashed background, its stars, rifle, canteen and
wheat emblazoned in red and yellow, had come home 1 day with the Division
Commander.’’16 When the Division Commander puts the sign there, he also
questions Wu’s understanding of it and gives him the hint to pay special attention to
it. ‘‘And from that moment on, the sign became the most distinguished, most
illustrious resident of the dining table, casting its mighty symbolic shadow over the
lowly bottles of vinegar, chili sauce and sesame oil.’’17 To Wu Dawang, to serve the
people means to serve the Division Commander and his wife especially! He worked
for the family for 6 months heart and soul.
While, the other main character of the fiction— the Division Commander’s wife,
32-year-old Liu Lian, who is almost 20 years younger than her husband, is also
aware of the significance or function of ‘‘serving the people’’ and she interprets and
illustrates it in her own rationale: ‘‘Serve the people—I am the people—If you
cannot serve me—You have to go’’. When the Division Commander is away from
home for a long period of time, Liu Lian starts her act of taming the orderly Wu
Dawang and teaching him who is ‘‘the people’’. She is like a hunter, hunting for her
prey, Wu Dawang. She told Wu that ‘‘whenever this sign’s not in its usual place, it
means I need you upstairs for something.’’18 At the beginning, Wu was frightened
for he knew that to have an affair with Division Commander’s wife is not what he is
supposed to do. There is a rule that he has recited many times before coming to the
15
A Hukou is a record in the system of household registration required by law in China. Because of the
huge difference between rural and urban residency status, people used to prefer City Hukou to
Countryside Hukou. The Hukou system is regarded as a caste system of China and is in the process of
being reformed at present.
16

Yan (2007, p. 3).

17

Ibid.

18

Ibid., p. 10.

123

‘‘Serve the People’’ from 1944 to 2005

51

Commander’s house—‘‘do not do what one is not supposed to do and do not say
what one is not supposed to say’’. But compared with another possible outcome that
he would be sent back to the barracks, and never have the chance to be promoted or
get his family City Hukou, he was in a dilemma of choosing between surrendering
to the seduction of Liu Lian or remaining faithful to his own family and morality. At
this period of hesitation, he was admonished again by his Political Instructor, that to
serve the Division Commander and his family members is exactly the meaning of
‘‘Serving the People’’. So he came back to his hunter, who then told him that she
had decided to let him go back to his hometown and stay with his wife forever. With
this tremendous threat as a stimulus, Wu fell to his knees before Liu Lian begging
for another chance. Here the previously reluctant prey has totally surrendered
himself to the hunter and is willing to do anything that he is told to do, such as
taking off his clothes piece by piece in front of her, etc. In order to get the minimal
chance of a better living, Wu Dawang, a member of the ‘‘people’’ who should be
served according to the previous instruction of Mao is not served by those of higher
ranks at all. Here comes the crucial question raised by this fiction: Who are the
‘‘people’’? Are they the masses who had supported the Eighth Route Army or New
Fourth Army to get the control of the government? Or are they the leaders who have
been given power to determine little potatoes’ fate? The answer given in the fiction
of Serve the People obviously points to the latter and Yan Lianke deliberately
deconstructs a widely accepted truth about ‘‘serving the people.’’ He makes use of
the drastic verbal parody to deny it and discloses an opposite factual connection in
an extremely sarcastic way, which will be further analyzed in the following section.

Parody and rethinking of justice and fear
In Yan Lianke’s fiction, the wooden sign ‘‘serve the people’’ plays a crucial role in
the development of plot and undergoes changes in its symbolic meaning as a
powerful parody. In this aspect, there is a similarity between this fiction and
Hawthorne’s Scarlet Letter. In Hawthorne’s novel, the scarlet letter ‘‘A’’ is meant to
be a mark of shame for Hester, for letter ‘‘A’’ represents Hester’s un-repented
‘‘adultery’’ which initially ostracizes her from the community. But Hester does not
surrender to the judgment towards her from the community and defiantly
embroiders a beautiful Letter ‘‘A’’ on her coat. Later with her kind nature and
willingness to tend the sick and help with the public service, gradually the meaning
of ‘‘A’’ is changed, for it is interpreted by the community as ‘‘Able’’; and finally
‘‘Angel’’. Though the plots of two fictions share nothing in common, the symbolic
signs play a similar function, which is to reveal the writers’ meditation on what is
right or just. What is justice? Etymologically speaking, it comes from Latin word
‘‘justus’’ and ‘‘jus’’ means ‘‘right’’ or ‘‘lawful’’. The change of the symbolic
meaning of Letter ‘‘A’’ is finally realized because Hester believes in the moral law
within her heart and persistently tries to justify it in the community and change the
negative ‘‘A’’ into a positive ‘‘A’’. Serve the People also contains a highly symbolic
social meaning of sublime justice the first time it is used in the 1944 speech. Mao
used it to call people’s attention to the necessity of remembering people’s interests.

123

52

J. Wang

As at that time, a large number of poor Chinese people, especially farmers and
workers were expecting equality with those who had money (say rich bankers) or
power (regional warlords). The phrase ‘‘serve the people’’ at that time had a highly
positive social significance and it was a good timing for Mao to populate that idea so
as to win more support for the revolutionary cause. In 2005, Yan Lianke used it as
the title of his fiction again and it was also a good timing. The reaction from the
government is suggested to be viewed as a piece of evidence. It irritated the
authority so much that all the issues of Huacheng Magazine which contained this
novella were recalled. Another reason of its good timing lies in the fact that it was
published 60 years after Mao’s speech and 60 years is an important time span.
According to traditional Chinese way of recording days and years, there are
Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches (known as Tiangan and Dizhi in Chines),
which form a sexagenary cycle.19 So 60 years mean a full circle and a round of
reincarnation with rebirth of old things. By deconstructing the sublime significance
of ‘‘Serve the people’’, the fiction depicts a background that 60 years after Mao’s
famous speech, the interests of the masses are still not fully paid attention to by the
authorities and ordinary people still have to serve those who have official power.
Obviously this phenomenon goes against what Maoism or Marxism used to suggest
when planning for the future of a socialist country. In the 1940s, the masses in China
wholehearted supported the Communist Party, because they abhorred those who
bullied them and wanted to experience justice with the help of Communist Party.
60 years later, there are still people who are bullied and kicked around by some
merciless and immoral authorities. The ironic parody of the state slogan
deconstructs completely its authenticity and forcefully tears off the hypocritical
veil of certain authorities. The parody here is obviously a deconstruction, but what is
to be constructed after the deconstruction?
Usually this fiction is read as a story about the love affairs between a lower
ranking solider and a Division Commander’s sex-starved wife centering on a
wooden sign of ‘‘serve the people’’; or a parody of a historical discourse with
insinuation of ridiculous Chinese political life. There is also a third way to read it.
This fiction could be interpreted as a meditation about fear. If one segregates the
development of Wu and Liu’s love affairs into 4 stages (1. Wu Dawang’s heart and
soul service towards the Division Commander and his wife for 6 months; 2. Liu
Lian’s seducing Wu when the impotent Commander was away from home; 3. Wu
and Liu’s Adam-and-Eve-like life for days inside the Commander’s house; 4. Wu’s
being demobilized so as to be kept away from Liu Lian) and studies each section in
detail, one could find that in every stage, fear is involved.
At the first stage, it was because of the fear towards the authorities that Wu dare
not doubt or challenge any word by the Division Commander and he took the
wooden sign of ‘‘serve the people’’ as the highest command towards him. He
followed the principle that ‘‘to work at the commander’s home is to serve the
people’’ and ‘‘not to say what should not be said and not to do what should not be

19
Though this timing system is no longer used in the contemporary official calendar in China, it still
continues to play a significant role in contemporary Chinese astrology and fortune telling, etc.

123

‘‘Serve the People’’ from 1944 to 2005

53

done.’’ No one can deny that with this fear in mind, Wu was tremendously careful
and meticulous in his work.
At the second stage, when the Division Commander had to go away for a
2-month-long conference to discuss plans for army force reductions. The middleaged but beautiful Liu Lian attempted to seduce Wu. She continuously made use of
Wu Dawang’s awe towards the wooden sign of ‘‘serve the people’’ in the house and
told Wu to follow the direction of the wooden sign. It was because of the fear of
losing the chance of being promoted that Wu surrendered to Liu Lian’s temptation
after a hesitant and wavering period. It should be mentioned that The Chinese
pronunciation of the name ‘‘Liu Lian’’ is also a homonym of ‘‘durian’’, ‘‘king of
fruits’’ with a strong odour and formidable thorn-covered husk. The soft flesh inside
is regarded fragrant and delicious by some people, but there are also many others
who feel its aroma overpowering and revolting. ‘‘Liu Lian’’ seems to be a durian to
Wu Dawang, as he viewed her as a thorn-covered figure at the beginning, but later
he started to find her not so fearsome, instead, rather edible or even delicious.
At the third stage, after the hunted, Wu Dawang, has sexually satisfied Liu Lian
many times, he more or less found the glory of being a hunter, as Liu Lian treated
him like a husband. For 3 days, they stayed indoors totally naked. When they got
hungry, they ate; when they got tired, they slept; when they woke up, they made
love. It seems that Wu Dawang’s fear has gradually disappeared. When realizing
that making love might get boring, Liu trapped Wu to tip over a statue of Chairman
Mao and got it broken. Liu then pretended that she was going to report Wu to the
military police immediately. With this unprecedented terrifying fear, Wu made
ardent love with Liu and brought her higher level of satisfaction. After realizing the
unexpected power of fear in their sexual relationship, they destroyed all the
revolutionary objects that they could find in the house and made unrestraint love.
So, to promote the sexual relations and orgasm between them, not only the wooden
sign of ‘‘Serve the People!’’ is applied, but also other methods, such as crushing
chairman Mao’s plaster, tearing Mao’s Anthology or portraits with Lin Biao, or
posters of the ‘‘highest order’’ and so on. Till this point, the story goes to the
exaggeration: Yan Lianke deconstructs not only the meaning of ‘‘Serve the People’’
from a political slogan to a sexual gadgets, but also many other political symbols in
China. The transformation of the traditional political symbols is as absurd as
Kafka’s The Metamorphosis, and its significance in the twenty first century in China
is as enormous as that of Kafka’s novella in the twentieth century in the western
world. What’s more, as a Franz Kafka Prize winner in 2014, Yan Lianke is not only
good at metamorphosed narration of the truth; he is also familiar with contemporary
western literary theory such as Foucault’s power relationships in society, as well as
Freudian psychoanalysis. And the fiction Serve the people exemplifies how craftily
he combines the two. It should be mentioned that Yan Lianke is not only a
prominent writer, but also a professor of literature at Renmin University in China.
He graduated from Henan University in 1985 with a degree in politics and
education, and from the People’s Liberation Army Art Institute with a degree in
Literature in 1991. His education background indicates that he has significant
familiarity with western literary theory which was in its heyday in 1980s and 1990s
in China. Thus it is argued that at the third stage, the possible psychological

123

54

J. Wang

explanation for it is that fear itself does have a stimulating effect. Fear functions as
the tool to arouse and add up the characters’ sexual desire. By releasing the longhidden fear pressed upon them—the fear that makes them dare not show any sign of
disloyalty to the authority, they recovered another sense of freedom. And here
comes another twist of the plot, when they both surrender to the human primal
nature, gradually, the hunter willingly becomes the prey of the hunted; they enjoyed
themselves like Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. Surprisingly, when they are
naked before their primitive need, there is a sort of equality between them. Liu Lian
wants to serve Wu Dawang too, such as cooking for him or feeding him. So far this
subversive story not only satires ideology, ambition and conformity, but also leads
readers to sympathize with the newly found love between Liu Lian and Wu
Dawang. Subconsciously, readers might expect that the writer of this story would
arrange a happy ending of Wu Dawang and Liu Lian staying together, for example,
running to a faraway place, enjoying their love till the end of their life. There are
examples in the fiction for them to follow: the Division Commander’s ex-wife has
divorced him and sought for her own freedom.
However, the fiction does not go in this direction. At the fourth stage, Liu Lian
was asked by Wu if she could go away with him instead of continuing her sexless
marriage with the Division Commander, and her answer is negative. When asked
the reason, she replied that because that’s a man reaching the rank of the Division
Commander, she wouldn’t divorce him. She refused to divorce him, not because of
her love toward him, but because of his official rank. What does that rank
represent to her? It represents the possibility that she could ask people like Wu
Dawang to serve her. From this point, it could be seen that she is also a prisoner of
fear, for fear of losing certain privileges lets her surrender to power. Thus it is
argued that throughout the fiction ‘‘fear’’ plays a crucial role. Fear of losing the
chance of being promoted to officialdom and fear of being punished as a traitor,
urged Wu Dawang to let go his reasoning, self-control and morality. Fear of losing
her privilege of an officer’s wife jailed Liu Lian inside a house with a husband she
does not love.
Besides Wu and Liu, these two leading figures in the fiction, all other characters
also live in the shadow of fear. The Division Commander fears that his family secret
would be known by others, or Wu Dawang might cause any unexpected trouble,
thus it is arranged that Wu should be sent to demobilization as quickly as possible,
and ‘‘every last detail had been taken care of—urgently and meticulously, and far,
far above Wu Dawang’s head’’. It is speculated that the Commander’s fear is also
partly the reason of his disbanding his unit. All the other soldiers and officers in the
fiction are also beseiged in the state of fear. After visiting his wife and family in the
country side, Wu returned to the barrack only to find chaos and fear everywhere.
The soldiers and their leaders had got some information about the disbanding, but
they did not know the details. They were in a jittery state, waiting for the uncertain
fate. These soldiers joined the army under the belief of ‘‘Protecting the Motherland’’
and ‘‘Serving the People’’, but all of them also cherished dreams that they might be
promoted or get rid of their fate of being a farmer for their whole life. But it turned
out, they would all be sent back home with only one exception—Wu Dawang who
was accorded military honors and the title of a model soldier and thus would be

123

‘‘Serve the People’’ from 1944 to 2005

55

given opportunities of working and living in the city together with his family
members. At this point, the leaders in the army still remember to promote the notion
of ‘‘serving the people’’. ‘‘The Head of Management and the Political Instructor
jointly exhorted the assembled company to learn from Comrade Wu Dawang’s
example, reminding their audience that the People only remembered and helped
those who selflessly served them. If they all gave something of themselves, as Wu
Dawang had, the army would help them, just as they had helped Wu Dawang find a
job that would enable him to continue making the utmost contribution to
socialism.’’20 Ironically, it was this Political Instructor who later begged Wu to
say some good words for him in front of Liu Lian so as to avoid the fate of being
sent back to the countryside. The soldiers in the fiction may not know what is going
on, but readers are clear that here the ‘‘people’’ who rewarded Wu Dawang, does not
refer to the mass or the people, but to those who had power. Wu got what he had
dreamed of, not because of his whole-hearted housing service to the Division
Commander’s family (his instructor has also done that before), but because he has
made Liu Lian pregnant. Standing in front of his fellow soldiers, Wu Dawang could
not reveal the truth, so he remained silent. His silence represents the silence of all
those who were forced to bend themselves to power for fear of losing the tiny
chance of life. People in this fiction are victims of the fear towards power, and
another fear, which is also universal, is fear towards money. As Uruguayan writer
Eduardo Galeano points out in his Book Upside Down: A Primer for the LookingGlass World, that all people are in a world of fear and crippled by fear. According to
him, they are all captive of fear, no matter those on the top, or on the bottom, or in
the middle. The powerful are fearful of losing the control over the oppressed and the
oppressed live in the fear of losing whatever little they have, ‘‘fear of living, fear of
falling, fear of losing your job, your car, your home, your possessions, fear of never
having what you ought to have….’’21 Fear drives countries, economies and destinies
and many people choose to live in their own little comfortable bubbles in order to
avoid confronting their fears.
Fear teaches people to look for any possible way towards security instead of
justice. The fiction Serve the People in a certain way reveals a truth to readers that it
is only when free of fear that one could get real freedom and true understanding of
humanity and justice. Wu Dawang has never reasoned the justice of serving the
Division Commander and his family, for there is only fear or awe within him. He
fears the Commander, who is the highest officer he has ever encountered; he fears
losing the post, which is the only way that he could realize his dream of getting his
family members a better future; He served them heart and soul but it is a deviated
concept of the original ‘‘serve the people’’ which was to bring justice to the masses.
All the other soldiers and officers at the barrack are also blind to justice as they are
imprisoned by fear too. They follow the order and fear of being punished or
demobilized, which deprives them of their chances to reason whether there is justice
from the authorities. Justice is an abstract word in the fiction, and the concrete
manifestation of justice here is every soldier’s wish to live in a better situation, or
20

Yan (2007, pp. 203–204).

21

Galeano (2001, p. 19).

123

56

J. Wang

that they would be respected and their own dignity could be preserved. When they
are drilling hard for the peace of the whole country, they have the right to be
respected by the authorities. J. M. Coetzee has a comment on the ethic of
authenticity, ‘‘being authentic includes being able to lie and steal and cheat as long
as you don’t pretend to yourself that you are not a liar and a thief and a cheat.’’22
Psychologically speaking, moral people would be spiritually tortured if they realize
that they are not preserving the justice and it is because the authorities have the
power and chance not to pretend, it is easier for the authorities rather than for the
masses to abandon their primary commitment to justice and equality. The fiction
Serve the People vividly reveals how the power enables people to discard justice
and equality easily. Just because she is the Division Commander’s wife, Liu Lian
could let another human kneel down in front of her, and she represents those who
apply the authority or authenticity in a negative way. But one point should be
mentioned that not all the time that Liu is superior to Wu, for there is a time that
spiritual equality arises when they lost themselves in sensual enjoyment. Liu
appears in a form of traditional docile wife and Wu a cocksure husband. In front of
human’s natural sexual instinct, the worldly official rank stops functioning. The
disadvantage of this fiction also comes out of this sort of arrangement of the plot.
Yan Lianke’s making use of the political slogan ‘‘Serve the people’’ intertexually is
exemplarily well done, but his choosing to let the two main characters resolve the
issue of justice by relying on the male sexual potency or human’s primary sexual
desire, weakens his fiction’s satirical force. Nevertheless, Wu Dawang and Liu Lian
did find out a way to stay in the space of love so as to make fear an impossibility. So
to meditate on the ending of the fiction, there is still the question of whether the
justice is obtained. On the surface, Wu Dawang has got what he wanted, for he and
his family members were finally able to live in the city, besides he has got an
unforgettable experience of exotic love affair with a ‘‘durian-like’’ woman; but if it
is studied further, because of the lack of justice, what he has got is only poetic
justice. Because the way he got what he has dreamed of is not sublime, he, together
with the Division Commander, and Liu Lian, will always live in the fear of someone
else knowing what had really happened. What is more, Wu Dawang would never be
able to see his own child born by Liu Lian.
Besides the defect mentioned above, generally speaking, the fiction Serve the
People is rather a forceful novella which depicts the pervasiveness of fear and
reveals the author’s endless seeking for justice. In 1944, the slogan of ‘‘serve the
people’’ was wholeheartedly welcomed by the people who were seeking for justice,
roughly 60 years later in 2005, Yan wrote a fiction bearing the same title to remind
people that though this concept has been taken for granted verbally, it has not been
achieved in the long period of practice actually. Through the transformation and
deconstruction of the meaning of the key phrase, Yan Lianke’s hypertext draws
readers to the denotation and connotation of the word ‘‘people’’ step by step and
triggers them to question who are ‘‘the people’’ that are served. Justice, love and fear
are closely knitted together. Where there is no genuine love, there is no justice, and
both those in power and those without power live in fear, having no freedom to face
22

Coetzee and Kurtz (2015, p. 85).

123

‘‘Serve the People’’ from 1944 to 2005

57

or speak out the truth. Yan Lianke’s fiction reminds readers again that they are all
the captives of fear, but have not realized their actual state of being prisoners.
People think that only those prisoners of the penal system, who wear numbers on
their chests, are genuine prisoners, but it turns out to be wrong. In fact most people
live in fear and if they want to break free, only genuine love together with
responsibility such as what Hester’s angel-like ‘‘A’’ represents, could save them and
also save the world from injustice. Only by genuine love, could fear be chased
away. As Yan pointed out in his Kafka Prize acceptance speech titled ‘‘Seeking the
light’’, ‘‘[T]he most powerful and frightening darkness comes from people’s
accommodation and surrender to the darkness, forgetting the light, hence the
greatness of literature demonstrates, because only literature can find the weakest and
tiniest ray of light, beauty, warmness and honest love in the dark.’’23 Seeking for
justice or ‘‘Seeking the light’’ is a universal theme and in the fiction of Serve the
people, it was wrapped in a most daring, sensually shocking but imaginative way.
By borrowing and deconstructing the meaning of this worldly well-known phrase—
‘‘Serve the people’’, Yan Lianke metaphorically reveals his abhorrence and
objection toward political injustice in China and exposes both the politicians and the
masses before the issue of ‘‘serving the people’’. Though the fiction is set in a
Chinese cultural space, its implication and significance go beyond any particular
political regime.

References
Coetzee, J. M., & Kurtz, A. (2015). The good story: Exchanges on truth, fiction and psychotherapy.
London: Harvill Secker.
Galeano, E. (2001). Upside down: A primer for the looking-glass world. New York: Picardo USA.
Genette, G. (1997). Palimpsests: Literature in the second degree. Nebraska: U of Nebraska Press.
Kristeva, J. (1980). Desire in language: A semiotic approach to literature and art. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Mao, T. (1966). SERVE THE PEOPLE, September 8, 1944. Beijing: Commerce Publishing House.
Mao, T. (1991). Selected works of Mao Tse-Tung (Vol. 3). Beijing: People’s Publishing House.
Mao, T. (1999). Marxism’s epistemology and dialectics (1963–1965). In CCCPC Party Literature
Research Office (Ed.), The works of Mao Zedong (Vol. 8). Beijing: People’s Publishing House.
Mao, T. (1999b). The works of Mao Zedong (Vol. 3). Beijing: People’s Publishing House.
Mao, T. (2003). Collections of Mao Tse-Tung’s letters. Beijing: Central Party Literatures Press.
Yan, L. (2007). Serve the People (Trans. Julia Lovell). Melbourne: Text Publishing House.

23

http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/culture/2014-10/29/content_18818584_3.htm/ 10. October, 2015.

123

