Annali di Ca’ Foscari
Vol. 50 – Dicembre 2014

ISSN 2385-3042

‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness
The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine
(PFLP) Between 1983 and 1984
Francesco Saverio Leopardi (The University of Edinburgh, UK)
Abstract After the evacuation from Beirut in late 1982, the PFLP tries to formulate new policy
patterns, both at the Palestinian and the regional level, in order to present its own alternative, opposing Arafat’s attempts to start direct negotiations with Israel under US sponsorship. Despite
all the efforts made, the PFLP fails to effectively implement its agenda and results weakened at
the end of this phase vis-à-vis Fatah-PLO leadership. From this, stems the necessity to report and
assess PFLP’s line and narrative during such a critical phase. The systematic study of PFLP’s official publications (communiqués, congress resolutions, interviews released by the leaders, etc.),
in the framework of the broader historiography on the Arab-Israeli conflict, is the methodology
employed to achieve these goals. PFLP’s official documentation, published by the party’s mouthpiece Al-Hadaf, can be retrieved at the library of the Institute for Palestine Studies in Beirut.
Summary 1. Introduction. — 2. The Popular Front Resettles in Damascus. — 2.1. The Rapprochement with Syria. — 2.2. Defending Soviet Prestige: PFLP’s Search for USSR Support. — 2.3.
The ‘Strategic’ Importance of Syrian-Soviet Axis. — 3. Coalition Politics: The Union of the Left to
Counterbalance Arafat’s Growing Power. — 3.1. A Sign of Weakening. — 3.2. PFLP-DFLP Joint
Command: The Need for PLO Reform. — 3.3. A ‘National Front’ Against Arafat. — 4. Conclusion:
The Preparation of the 17th PNC and the Failure of Coalition Politics. — 4.1. The Fatah-Democratic
Alliance Negotiations and the ‘Aden Agreement’. — 4.2. The Convocation of the 17th PNC in Amman: The Seal of Arafat’s Primacy.

1 Introduction
The 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the three-month long siege on
the capital represent a crossroad for the whole Palestinian Liberation
Organization. Forced to evacuate from Beirut and deprived of its military
and civil infrastructures in Lebanon, the PLO seeks the road toward a new
strategy to gain its main goal of liberating Palestine. However, the debate
on the agenda for the new stage is a catalyst for historic rifts within the
PLO: its leadership, that is Fatah, devotes itself to a diplomatic strategy
which entails a rapprochement with Egypt and Jordan, favorable to a political settlement of the conflict with Israel, and sees the United States as
the only power able to guarantee an agreement. The PLO leftist opposition instead, with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine at its
DOI 10.14277/2385-3042/5p

75
75

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

forefront, rejects the idea of a political path leading to a peace agreement
with the Zionist enemy. A political settlement under US tutelage and in
collaboration with the Jordanian and Egyptian regimes would mean the
complete marginalization of PFLP’s revolutionary line within the PLO. Indeed, the PFLP always distinguished itself within the PLO for its hard-line
positions vis-à-vis the confrontation with Israel and its global revolutionary
views, according to which the Palestinian liberation movement should not
only aim to the liberation of the homeland but also to achieve a socialist
revolution all over the Arab east. Another distinctive trait of the PFLP is
also its well-defined and quite rigid political doctrine which absorbed the
experience of several revolutionary movements like Maoism and Guevarism. These features contrast in particular with Fatah generic nationalism
which however, ensured to Arafat’s organization a wider popularity, and
are also at the base of PLO internal divisions resurfacing with unprecedented strength in the aftermath of 1982 Lebanon War. In the light of
this considerations, it is clear why the PFLP, throughout 1983 and 1984
sought to put into practice a radical alternative to Fatah diplomatic strategy, looking for coordination with other leftist faction, the DFLP first of
all, and aligning itself with Syria at the regional level and with the USSR
at the global one. Nevertheless, both external factors such as Syrian will
to exploit the opposition to liquidate Arafat and take over the PLO, and
internal ones, like the inability to build a cohesive leftist front to restrain
Arafat’s autocratic drift, undermined PFLP’s effort and led to the failure
of its post-Lebanon agenda sealed by 1985 Arafat-Hussein agreement to
form a joint Palestinian-Jordanian delegation for possible negotiation.
The importance of studying the PFLP relies on the fact that so far, scholarly works on the PLO focus on its mainstream, namely Fatah, giving to the
Popular Front the space of a secondary actor (Sayigh 1989; Cobban 1984). For
their part, those works treating specifically PLO internal dialogue illustrate
some PFLP’s position with more details, but always tend to highlight Fatah
evolution and adaptability vis-à-vis a quickly changing context (Gresh 1988;
Sahliyeh 1986). To date, only one monograph was consecrated to Habash’s
party addressing mainly its structure and ideology (Cubert 1997) and one
article outlining PFLP decision-making process and internal contradictions
(AbuKhalil 1987). Conversely, a significant number of studies has been dedicated to PFLP precursor, the Arab Nationalists Movement, illustrating its
formation, the ideological evolution from rightist nationalism to Marxism and
finally its demise leading to the emergence of national offshoots among which
the PFLP (Kazziha 1975; Al-Kubeisi 1977; Barut 1997). In some of these latter
works, the first years of the PFLP are addressed but again, little attention has
been paid to this faction during later phases, especially to the years of decline
which led to today’s marginalization. In Palestine itself, the subject of the
decline of the left has been partly treated (Hilal 2009; Ladadwe 2014) but not
the specific case of single organizations. Therefore to fill these lacks, a study
76

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

of PFLP’s course in its more recent years is key. Such a study should focus on
the choices and the policies adopted by the Popular Front to counter its own
weakening and to preserve a decisive influence within the PLO. Hence, this
essay is a first attempt to address the gaps of historiography concentrating
on the period when the problem of marginalization emerged forcibly and the
PFLP made its first attempts to resist it.

2 The Popular Front Resettles in Damascus
2.1

The Rapprochement with Syria

The forced choices made after September 1982 by PLO leadership to establish a new base in Tunis and by the PFLP to settle in Damascus were
both signs of a serious weakening that led every faction inside the Palestinian national movement to accept some unprecedented compromises.
Unlike in the aftermath of 1971 eviction from Jordan, the Palestinian armed
organizations had no hope to find in Tunisia, nor in Syria, the favorable
conditions encountered in Lebanon. Yasser Arafat decided to bet on his
diplomatic strategy and he needed as much independence as possible for
his initiative in order to open a new course in PLO’s relations with Egypt
and Jordan: the price to pay was an exile-like base in Tunis and the risk of
major splits inside the Liberation Organization (Sahliyeh 1986, pp. 87-91).
On the other hand, the PFLP could not afford to deny completely its twodecades long radical stand and, in the current situation, Syria was the only
State in the Arab east adopting a ‘steadfast’ position toward the conflict.
The PFLP knew that it was losing much of its independence and freedom
of action while moving to Damascus but its adherence to a radical strategy
did not leave much room for other possibilities. In other words, the PFLP
was unable to compete within the framework of the ‘Jordanian option’ that
prevailed in post-Lebanon period in the ranks of the PLO: this definition
has been used to define PLO leadership decision to shift its attention and
presence toward the Occupied Territories and Jordan and toward a political
strategy, abandoning the military approach that dominated the previous
decade (Khalidi 1985b, p. 90). For its part, the Popular Front had some
significant implantations in the Occupied Territories, but the bulk of its
mass support was still in the Beirut refugee camps and in Syrian controlled
Lebanese areas as well as in the Yarmouk refugee camp in Damascus.
From this stemmed PFLP’s reluctance to leave Lebanon and the decision
to settle in Syria as for the Party the proximity to the occupied homeland
was not only a matter of propaganda but also one of strategic importance.
However, every Arab State that directly dealt with Palestinian armed
presence never had the intention to allow to the PLO a full autonomy of acLeopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness77

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

tion and Syria was no exception. President Hafiz al-Assad in particular was
highly averse to Arafat freedom of action at least since the disruption of the
Lebanese civil war; after ‘Egypt’s historic ‘betrayal’ in 1979 Syria’s main
goal in its regional policy was the creation of a bloc formed with Lebanon
and the PLO in order to break its isolation and reach a hegemonic position
(Hinnebusch 1986, p. 13). As the PLO chairman seemed always more committed to the Jordan option, Syria tried to influence Palestinian policies in
the new stage through PLO opposition groups based in Damascus, notably
the PFLP: in this phase the Popular Front could not but accept that its goals
coincided with Syrian ones.
In the first aftermath of Israel’s invasion, the PFLP and Syria objectives
became actually closer mainly due to their opposition to American efforts
to implement a political settlement between Lebanon and Israel, which
was comprehensive also of the withdrawal of all foreigners forces: an
equation that put on the same level Israeli, Syrian and Palestinian armed
presence on the Lebanese territory. The signature of the Lebanese-Israeli
agreement of the 17th May 1983 definitely seemed to put the Palestinians
and Syria in the same camp and the PFLP grasped the occasion to call for
the development of a common strategy with Syria and the Lebanese National Movement: the PFLP, alongside Syria, refused the linkage of Israeli
and Syrian forces withdrawal and asked a unilateral Israeli withdrawal
instead. Moreover, the Party thought that an increased level of military
coordination with Syria was also needed because it was not possible to
exclude another Israeli blow in order to liquidate the last obstacles to
the normalization of its relations with Lebanon. At this regard, the PFLP
estimated that Israel could resort to confessional divisions in order to
deliver the final attack to Syria and the Palestinian revolution, therefore
the alliance with the biggest ‘nationalist’ force operating in Lebanon, appeared as the best way to prepare for defense (PFLP Information Department 1983, p. 105).
However, the 1976 Syrian intervention against the PLO in Lebanon was
not that far and the PFLP had to make an important effort of pragmatism
to justify such an alliance. In addition, the Popular Front historically, has
defined its linkages with Syria and all other «nationalist regimes» at the
same time as of «alliance and conflict». On the one hand, the PFLP considered those regimes as allies in case of direct confrontation with Israel. On
the other, the Arab nationalist states, due to their ruling «petit-bourgeois
elites» did not look with favor at PFLP’s all-out revolutionary project and
disliked its military strategy, namely guerilla warfare, as this could vehicle
its revolutionary calls in the countries where it was operating (PFLP Information Department 1972, pp. 70-78). Therefore, the situation emerged
after 1982 required also a theoretical reformulation of PFLP’s positions
toward Syria.
At this regard, the Party, could count on the lessons of the most impor78

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

tant Marxist forces worldwide: for example, in this case, Maoist doctrine
on primary and secondary inconsistencies allowed the PFLP to be flexible
in its foreign policy and to adapt to a continuously changing situation
of conflict (Tse-Tung 1967, pp. 311-345). After 1982, the PFLP could not
afford to adopt a conflicting stand with Syria, therefore, contradictions
with the Syrian regime, although always on the ground, automatically
became less important and justified the pursuit of a greater entente with
Assad. In addition this rapprochement with Syria was not just dictated
by a post-war urgent necessity: it was the result of internal pressure by
the pro-Syrian group led by Abu Ali Mustafa, PFLP’s deputy SecretaryGeneral. After the stroke that hit Habash in 1979, his leadership started
to lose weight in the decision making process while Mustafa’s group
raised in importance. This internal current, from that moment on, tried
as much as it could to align the Party with Syria’s plans for the conflict
(AbuKhalil 1987, pp. 367-369).
Since the PFLP found almost all of its mass-based support from Palestinian refugees in Lebanon, the weight of their opinion in Party’s policies
was preponderant if compared to that of Palestinians exiled in other Arab
country or living in the Occupied Territories: for these reasons the perception they had of Syria’s role in Lebanon received more attention by PFLP
leadership. Syria’s image among both Lebanese and Palestinians positively
changed after the Israeli invasion. Before Israel’s military operation Syria
was much more perceived as simply another actor who wanted to impose
its interests and hoped to benefit from the conflict. Although one cannot
speak of a full support to the Syrian regime, the direct confrontation with
the Zionist enemy mitigated the negative image that was attached to Syria
intervention in Lebanon since 1976: the Syrian forces were an Arab army
that was now directly opposed to the major enemy. This shift in people’s
perception of Syria revealed useful for the PFLP in presenting the coordination with Syria as a natural development of the ongoing war, not only
against Israel’s proxies but also directly against Zionist forces
Furthermore, despite the hard setback that Syria underwent during its
short military confrontation with Israel in summer 1982 and its consequent
withdrawal from the Chouf and south Lebanon, the Syrian Army still owned
a remarkable military potential as the Soviet Union did not hesitate to
replenish its depleted arsenals. As a consequence, although Syria could
not compete with Israel’s military supremacy, it could easily impose an
overwhelming balance of power to the different militias in the Lebanese
occupied territories. In fact, Syria involvement in Lebanon was characterized by the use of force against armed factions in situation of crushing
favorable balance, the Palestinians knew it and the PFLP had no intention
to defy Syria’s strategy (Khalidi 1985a, pp. 506-508).

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness79

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

2.2 Defending Soviet Prestige: PFLP’s Search for USSR Support
Further divisions inside the PLO were fostered by the debate over the role
of the Soviet Union in the Arab-Israeli conflict and more precisely over the
importance of PLO alliance with the USSR in the wake of Israel’s invasion
and reoccupation of Lebanon. The PFLP was concerned by a decrease
of Soviet prestige within the Palestinian political arena: while none of
the fedayin organizations overtly raised doubts on the alliance with the
Soviet Union, some independent members of the council, as for example
Shafik al-Hout, highlighted Soviet ambiguous support for the PLO and its
low consideration of the alliance with the Palestinian National Movement
(Abu-Lughod 1983, p. 39). Therefore the PFLP, beside the DFLP and PFLPGC, committed itself to the defense of USSR’s role in the region. Actually,
at this regard during its 16th PNC speech, held in Algiers in from 14 to 22
February 1983, Habash referred to the Soviet Union to declare that
All the questions about what the USSR did during the siege aimed at
dividing the Palestinian revolution from their natural allies. I invite this
council to declare our clear distinction between our imperialist, Zionist
and reactionary enemies and our friends from the socialist countries
and the world national liberation movement. (Al-Hadaf 1983c, pp. 6-9)
The Party feared that these «negative tendencies» could gain popularity
inside the PLO and firmly denounced those declarations that affirmed that
«the key of the conflict was in American hands». These positions were
strengthening the «imperialist plans» of settlement by trying to marginalize
the importance of the major world actor engaged in the opposition to US expansion (PFLP Information Department 1983, p. 123). At the end of the PNC,
the PLO stated once more the strategic role played by the Soviet Union in
supporting liberation movements worldwide and formally reaffirmed USSR
influence on the Palestinian arena: this is to be considered a concession to
the leftist opposition made by a PLO leadership which was always more
disenchanted toward Soviet role (Galia Golan 1986, pp. 288-289).
After the signing of the 1979 Camp David accords, the USSR decided to
improve its relations with the PLO in order to counterbalance the loss of
Egypt and its transition toward the Western camp. This moment coincided
also with an improvement of Soviet Union’s relations with the PFLP. Once
very critical toward USSR’s stands about some central questions of the
conflict, the Popular front started to reduce its critics and showed a greater
alignment with Soviet views of Middle Eastern politics (Galia Golan 1983,
p. 13): for instance during the 16th session of the PNC, the PFLP pressured
for the rejection of the Reagan and Fahd peace plans while did not oppose
the acceptance of the Brezhnev proposal of settlement. Actually, the latter
was far from the Reagan plan as it recognized PLO’s role of unique repre80

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

sentative, but did not differ sensibly from the plan issued by the Saudi crown
prince which instead was labeled by the Party as the «base for the final liquidation» (Al-Hadaf 1983d, p. 5). In other words the PFLP did not blackmail
PLO leadership on the issue of the acceptance of any political solution of
the conflict, de facto eliminating the main reason of discord with the Soviet
Union which historically backed the idea of a partition of Palestine rather
than fully support PLO’s first long term goal to destroy Israel as a State (Ismael 2005, pp. 65, 76). One can better grasp the dimensions of this change
in PFLP’s positions if considers that, during the period of international aircrafts hijackings between 1968 and 1970 and even once this strategy had
been abandoned, the Soviets considered the Popular Front a Maoist faction
and accused it of «revolutionary adventurism», counter-productive to the
advance of the Arab liberation movement (Harris 1977, p. 149).
Although the rapprochement was a sensible one, there were still several
points of distance between Soviet projects for the Middle East and PFLP’s
understanding of the new phase. Nevertheless the Party avoided to stress
or mention these discrepancies both in its press organs and in its political
statements. In fact if the Popular Front was aligned on Syrian positions in
rejecting any of Arafat’s contacts with Egypt or Jordan, the Soviet Union
was not a-priori opposed to some sort of Arafat-Hussein coordination or to
the establishment of good relations between Mubarak and PLO chairman.
Actually the USSR did not want to be completely excluded from possible
peace negotiations and therefore was interested in presenting itself as a
fundamental actor, even in the eyes of those countries that were moving
closer to the Americans. Concerning the plan for a political settlements
of the conflict, the only point of full agreement between the Soviets and
Habash’s party was the firm rejection of the Reagan plan: the USSR was
playing a hard game of balances between its two most important allies,
namely Syria and the PLO, and between the different components of the
Palestine national movement (Freedman 1987, pp. 179-182).
The Soviet Union always showed its preference in supporting established governments rather than liberation movements, therefore despite
the existing inconsistencies with Syria, it decided to enhance its relation
with the Assad regime and to increase its presence in the country since
early 1983. Nevertheless, Soviets did not envisage a Syrian-controlled PLO
neither and consequently decided to improve the relations with Arafat as
well in order to balance Syria’s rejectionist stand. But beside that, the Soviets did not appreciate that PLO leadership did not totally close the door
to the American administration. In such a context, the USSR was trying to
maintain good relations with every possible actors in order not to preclude
any possibility of action: this policy-pattern led the Soviet Union to give
more importance and support to the rejectionist opposition inside the PLO,
stressing on PFLP or DFLP position, rather than that of Fatah, over the
Reagan plan (Galia Golan 1986, p. 192).
Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness81

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

Unfortunately for the USSR this policy did not succeed in balancing support to its different allies and resulted in eventually fostering PLO internal
split and hostility between the Palestinians and Syria: the civil war erupted
during 1983 summer in Tripoli among Arafat loyalists and Syria-backed
rebels represented the failure of this policy and became the worst scenario
the Soviet Union could face.

2.3 The ‘Strategic’ Importance of Syrian-Soviet Axis
Given this fragile game of balances, the PFLP committed, before and after
the Algiers PNC, to a propaganda effort aimed to present the viability of
the alliance with Syria and the fundamental necessity to rely on the USSR
and reject any American involvement.
The analyses published in PFLP’s Al Hadaf focused on the continued role
of opposition that Syria played during and after the war, towards Israel’s
aggressions and US attempt to impose a settlement. The stress was always
on the positive stand that Syria was adopting at the Arab level as well as on
the pressure that the Syrian Government was exercising on those regimes
favorable to negotiations within the American pattern: Syria declared that
it would attend upcoming Arab summits only to discuss the results reached
until then, excluding any debate on possible alignment of Arab positions
with the Reagan plan. Furthermore, the Assad regime was continually
urging Jordan not to join American settlement negotiations. PFLP’s account centered on the guarantee represented by Syrian armed presence
in Lebanon: a precious guarantee of protection for PLO’s interests. Before
the Tripoli crisis, the PFLP also used to remark that Syrian-Palestinian relations were experiencing a «real operation of correction» since until then
they were not «established on the right bases» (Al-Hadaf 1983e, pp. 4-5).
In its description of the important factors impeding the implementation
of American conspiracies, the PFLP distinguished between direct factors
and «helping» factors: while Syrian position was listed among the firsts,
Soviet stand was considered part of the second group, in line with Soviet
narrative over its intervention in Middle Eastern affairs, especially during
the Israeli invasion. In Popular Front’s views, progressive forces upgraded
their relation with the Soviet Union because the «strategic alliance» between them had to reach the level of the «strategic collaboration» existing
between the US and Israel. Moreover, Soviet increasing supplies of armaments to Syrian forces represented an important factors of deterrence
thwarting any «further imperialist attempt» to obtain the end of Palestinian and military presence in Lebanon (Al-Hadaf 1983g, p. 11).
In this moment of shifting alliances, the Popular Front was trying to
restitute a homogenous image of the Steadfastness Front, focusing on the
element of accordance between its regional and international patrons. In
82

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

Party’s narrative the Israeli invasion showed once more American unreliability which implied the unfeasibility of the diplomatic strategy. The clear
step to take was full adherence to armed struggle, which in the new phase
could only be carried through a greater reliance on the Syrian ally and its
Soviet backer (Al-Hadaf 1983h, pp. 4-5). The inconsistencies between the
renewed stress on the importance of armed struggle and the new posture
toward Soviet peace proposal is to be explained mainly with two factors: on
the one hand the PFLP needed to respect the principle of consensus within
the PNC as well as to pander the Soviets, on the other, the Popular Front
was fully involved in the Lebanese arena in a struggle for survival, therefore the rhetoric of armed resistance still played a major role in Party’s
narrative.

3 Coalition Politics: The Union of the Left to Counterbalance
Arafat’s Growing Power
3.1

A Sign of Weakening

The 16th session of the PNC followed the traditional pattern of consensus
politics but it was the last time that this principle was put into practice
(cf. Gresh 1988, pp. 231-238). In fact, the post war period was marked on
the one hand by Arafat’s increasing autonomy in decision-making and on
the other by the spreading pattern of coalition politics to which opposition
parties inside the Palestinian arena started to resort more frequently: from
this moment, the different factions that disagreed with Arafat’s line tried
to coordinate their policies in order to acquire a greater weight within the
PLO and counterbalance Fatah’s increasing power. That being so, coalition politics can be interpreted as a clear sign of the weakening that leftist
opposition was experiencing in that period (Sayigh 1989, pp. 254-255).
This conclusion is also reinforced if put in historic perspective. Actually,
the period which followed the foundation in 1967, until the 1970 ‘Black
September’, represented probably a peak in the power and the capabilities of the Popular Front, a phase during which the PFLP could seriously
claim to challenge Arafat’s leadership and attempt to take over the PLO.
But these were also the years of the painful splits which led to the creation
of the PFLP-GC first, and then of the Democratic Front. Despite the negative effects of these fragmentations, the PFLP managed to cope with them
and also to have a decisive influence on the rest of the PLO as testified
by its major role in dragging the Palestinian armed factions into military
confrontation with the Jordanian army despite Arafat’s initial tentative
to avoid such an outcome (Sayigh 1997, pp. 243-262). Conversely, more
than 10 years after these events, the leftist opposition had to form a coaLeopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness83

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

lition in the attempt to exert a significant influence on the PLO and the
single factions appeared unable to make their own agenda emerge without
resorting to this political instrument.
On the eve of the opening of the PNC, in January and early February 1983,
the PFLP stressed continuously on the importance of «building front-like internal relations between Palestinian factions, far from any form of monopoly,
individualism and authoritarianism» (Al-Hadaf 1983b, pp. 24-25) complaining also about the lack of attention reserved to the issue of national unity
until then. Therefore, the strong attachment that PNC resolution expressed
towards the unity of the PLO was considered as a result reached thanks
toe effort of the Popular Front: PFLP’s propaganda focused on «the spirit
of national unity» that characterized the National Council, welcoming PLO
adherence to the rejection of American peace plans. However, PNC formulation of the tasks for the new stage left space for free interpretations and
contacts between Arafat and Hussein continued undisturbed.

3.2 PFLP-DFLP Joint Command: The Need for PLO Reform
The whole opposition inside the PLO knew that the chairman was determined in pursuing his diplomatic strategy, therefore the PFLP and the
DFLP started to hold joint meetings since the first months after the PNC in
order to organize a prompt reaction to any possible ‘deviation’ from what
they considered as PNC political line. In April 1983, a statement issued
by one of these meetings clearly declared their priorities and concerns
towards Palestinian politics by affirming that «the two Fronts will firmly
stand against any retreat from Palestine National Council Resolutions»
(Al-Hadaf 1983f, pp. 12-13).
The PFLP and the DFLP were also concerned by the pressure to which
the PLO leadership was subjected especially from Jordan and saw the
increasing coordination between them as a useful tool to stop any attack
aimed at substituting the PLO in its representative role. A great danger
was embodied by «bureaucratic groups» and their «bourgeois aspirations» inside the national movement who were preaching the «American
solutions» for the conflict. At this regard the two organizations started to
call for sensible change in PLO main institutions:
The prompt application of democratic reform within the framework
of the PLO organs and institutions requires enforcing the democratic
forces among the Palestinian revolution’s forces. […] This reform should
be implemented within the framework of national unity and with adherence to the principle of internal democratic dialogue that will enhance
the role of the Palestinian national revolution and its national decisions.
(PFLP-DFLP 1983a, pp. 224-226)
84

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

Attachment to Palestinian national program and the urgency of wide-range
democratic reforms inside the PLO were the two main slogans waged by
the two fronts, especially when the first clashes between Fatah loyalists
and rebels started to occur in the Bekaa valley, in Lebanon, in June 1983.
The developments that the Lebanese and the Palestinian arenas lived
since the second half of 1983, namely growing tensions inside Fatah and
between PLO leadership and Syria as well as the clashes in the Lebanese AlJabal area between the National Forces and Phalanges-Lebanese army joint
forces, pressured the two factions toward a greater coordination, in order to
retain their political weight. As a results, at the end of June 1983 the PFLP
and the DFLP announced the formation of a «political and military Joint
Command» that would have been «responsible for the political affairs and
moves of the two Fronts and for their armed forces, within the framework
of strengthening the relations between them and unifying their ranks». The
official statement as well as analyses by PFLP’s cadres clearly defined the
would-be scope of this step: the Joint Command was not to be considered as
a simple ‘axis’, rather it represented the move toward a concrete unification
founded on «an objective basis». Moreover, the PFLP and the DFLP intended
to make more efforts to unify also their social institutions and trade unions.
In such a critical moment, the two Fronts’ aim was bolstering PLO institutions and role as well as to contribute to «the success of the decision of the
Palestine National Council, including the decision to establish a unified
Palestinian national army» (PFLP-DFLP 1983b, pp. 226-227).
But as PFLP press testified, this step received also some critics from
those who saw an attempt by the two factions to benefit from the serious
break that Fatah was experiencing. At this regard, the PFLP replied not
only that such move aimed to build a strong bases for the unity of leftist
forces, but that it was also a necessary decision in order to save the PLO
from the current impasse and to protect it from a further fragmentation,
an event that would only serve those forces aiming at its liquidation.
As Fatah internal crisis continued, the Joint Command decided to issue
a «program for unity and democratic reform» of the PLO on October the
first 1983: this proposal intended to represent a base for the salvation of
the PLO as well as to open a comprehensive dialogue on the major changes
to be implemented in the Liberation Organization. First of all, the program
defined three main dangers impending on the PLO namely, political liquidation, threats of divisions that became more likely since PLO evacuation from
Beirut and the eventual emergence of Fatah internal clashes and finally the
risk of «restriction» of the PLO through the imposition of an Arab tutelage
on it. These external factors apart, the document focused on PLO internal
problems with regards to foreign policy and organizational aspects. Since
the beginning of the post-Beirut phase, the PLO was not able to express
clear positions towards the main issues that concerned the organization,
despite those stands were fully defined by PNC resolutions: this situation
Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness85

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

was a consequence of the «preponderance of tactics on strategy» which led
to the implementation of «shortsighted maneuvers» that did not follow the
scope of long term interests. To be clearer, the program affirmed that this
shortsightedness emerged in several PLO improper behaviors: first, the
Palestine Liberation Organization disregarded its anti-imperialist nature
and consequently seemed to forget the «strategic truth» of the impossibility of coexistence between the Palestinian and Arab peoples and Zionism.
The Joint Command referred to the dialogue that chairman Arafat wanted
to open with those regional and international parts that called the PLO to
recognize Israel. More precisely the document condemned PLO leadership
tendency to put all the Arab regimes on the same level which allowed dialogue also with «reactionary regimes»: but the PLO forgot that it was part
of the Arab liberation movement and therefore, contacts and collaboration
were possible only with nationalist regimes, namely countries members of
the Steadfastness and Confrontation Front and Syria in particular. Turning
the attention on organizational aspects, the Joint Command highlighted the
growing «despotism and individualism» in the decision-making process
inside the PLO. Without directly mentioning Yasser Arafat, the document
denounced the «individualistic tendency» that exacerbated during the last
year in every context which was paralleled by a «category-based control»
inside PLO organs (Al-Hadaf 1983a, pp. 6-10).
All this was to the detriment of PLO institutions and the practice of collective command that characterized the PLO for the previous two decades
and fostered the emergence of a «bureaucratic class» inside PLO institutions accompanied by corruption and cronyism (Al-Hout 2009, p. 50). By
pointing out these problems the PFLP and the DFLP were recognizing the
arguments that Abu Musa, the Fatah-Uprising’s leader, put forward in
order to justify its rebellion against Arafat autocratic behavior (cf. Khalidi 1983, pp. 6-12; Rouleau et al. 1983, pp. 13-16). The whole national
movement was aware of the lack of democracy inside the PLO at that moment, but the Joint Command decided not to attack Arafat nor to ask for his
removal until his departure from Tripoli and the unprecedented meeting
with Hosni Mubarak in Egypt.
The solution to these problems was the implementation of democracy
at every level of the organization: the concept of «collective leadership»
had to be implemented again in every decisional organs and the control
of «deviation» was to be enforced. Furthermore the program of reforms
envisaged a stricter control over the effectiveness of the «highest councils
in the PLO» and the concession of a real autonomy to PLO unions and other
civil institutions: this entailed the enhancement of Occupied Territories
institutions in which every faction had to be represented according to its
electoral weight. Concerning economic and military aspects, unification
was the keyword for the correction of PLO path: a unified Palestinian army
had to be created as well as all PLO finances had to be managed in the
86

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

cadre of the Palestinian National Fund, which was considered as the only
institution that could equally distribute resources among the different factions without much corruption or cronyism.
All these organizational reforms had to be paralleled by PLO alignment
with the Arab Liberation Movement and by putting an end to every «ambiguous» contacts with «defeatist» leaders which were threatening the
implementation of PNC resolution and were a main cause of Fatah split
(Al-Hadaf 1983a, pp. 6-10).
Throughout the entire siege of Arafat’s loyalist forces in Tripoli, the
PFLP alongside other leftists factions, continued merely to call for the unity
of the movement and for dialogue and cohesion with the Syrian regime as
well as to offer its good services as mediator. However the break between
Arafat and Syria was too deep and the Joint Command was unable to play
any active role, further demonstrating the correspondence of coalition
politics and political weakening: this tragic episode of PLO history was
demonstrating Syria’s will to cancel the Palestinian national movement as
an independent actor in the Arab-Israeli conflict and put it under its tutelage, disavowing Joint Command intentions to depict it as a fundamental
ally (Rouleau 1983, p. 145). On the other hand, Arafat was not to give up the
path he started after PLO eviction from Beirut and demonstrated it by visiting Cairo, the 22nd of December 1983, during his evacuation from Tripoli.

3.3 A ‘National Front’ Against Arafat
The conflict with Syria and the blow he underwent in Tripoli drove PLO
chairman to an astonishing visit to Egypt with whom no contacts were held
since ‘Sadat’s betrayal’: once again Arafat reaffirmed his will to continue
the dialogue with the ‘moderate camp’ and reject any collaboration with
the ‘radicals’. In front of Arafat’s step the rest of the Palestinian movement, included a sensible part of Fatah, expressed deep outrage. For the
PFLP and the Joint Command, previously loyal to Arafat leadership, his
resignations became now an «urgent national mission». The decision of
accomplishing this trip, represented the most serious evidence that Arafat
was determined in continuing his ‘individualistic’ governance of the PLO.
Therefore George Habash, called every PLO organs to move to reestablish
democracy inside the national movement. The PFLP carried on an attack
merely to the person of the chairman, stating continuously its will to act
in respect of PLO rules and PNC resolutions. Similarly, Party’s cadres précised that they were not leading an attack to Fatah but they only wanted
every deviation to be removed: «the PLO was stronger than Yasser Arafat»
(Al-Hadaf 1983i, pp. 4-5).
Also after Arafat’s trip to Egypt, the pattern of coalition politics emerged
as a top priority for the PFLP: the call for the unity of the left and for its
Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness87

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

takeover in the PLO became a mantra repeated at every official occasion.
The 25th of December 1983, the Joint Command issued a proclaim together
with the Palestinian Communist Party (PCP) and the Palestine Liberation
Front (PLF) in which these factions invoked the formation of the «largest
Palestinian national front in order to end any form of conflict and partisan
rivalry» (Al-Hadaf 1984b, pp. 26-27).
This ‘Front’ had to be convened in the framework of the Central Council
of the PLO and at this regard the statement called Fatah Central Committee to further condemn the Arafat’s visit to Cairo and to facilitate the
organization of the Council: once this convened, all the parts refusing the
«defeatist line» would implement the procedures to destitute Arafat. In
addition the proclaim demanded Palestinian masses and institutions in the
occupied territories to hold a «national conference like the one held Jerusalem in 1978 to condemn and fight Sadat’s conspiracy». In sum, the four
parties called for Arafat’s total isolation both in the Palestinian as well as
in the regional arena: the PLO leftist opposition needed the unification of
Palestinian ranks to ouster the man that alone was imposing his strategy
to the Palestinian National movement.
In the attempt to close the ranks of the left, the PFLP also tried to emphasize the divisions inside Fatah in the hope that this would relinquish
Arafat’s path choosing the ‘steadfast’ approach and the alliance with Syria:
official statements and declarations by members of Fatah Revolutionary
Council or by Fatah Foreign Office were published in which high-rank
cadres rejected Arafat’s action and affirmed that the chairman planned
the trip by his own and thus lost his legitimacy inside the movement (AlHadaf 1984c, pp. 22-23).
However these efforts were not successful: at the end of March 1984
the Joint Command the PCP and the PLF, issued another declaration, also
known as the ‘Aden Statement’, that replicated the same call to all «nationalist personalities and forces» for the establishment of a collective
leadership (PFLP et al. 1984, pp. 206-207). No progresses were registered,
on the contrary, the hopes that Fatah members reactions to Arafat’s visit
would subvert the leadership inside the PLO, were sensibly smashed after
few months. Actually a Fatah political document issued in March, provoked
PFLP’s critics which considered it a serious regression from the previous
Fatah statements since it defined Arafat’s moves only as an «organizational
violation». This document, that intended to build the base for a dialogue
with the Joint Command, did not overtly condemn the visit nor took any
clear position toward Arafat’s contacts with Egypt and Jordan: in PFLP’s
views Arafat’s policies represented the main reason for PLO split and
without a firm denunciation, no dialogue was possible. For the PFLP, Fatah
leadership was trying to force a split in the Liberation Organization, pressuring opposite factions to leave the national movement in order to impose
its «new defeatist line» to other minor factions (Al-Hadaf 1984d, pp. 22-23).
88

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

Although, the Aden Statement entailed no particular advancement in the
dialogue between PLO leadership and leftist opposition the PFLP took this
meeting in high consideration because it represented an important step in
the formation of a united leftist front, the first condition to meet in order to
«correct» PLO political course after Arafat’s visit to Egypt. In January 1984
the «Democratic Alliance» was set up, the Joint Command established
common «points of views» with the Palestine Communist Party and the
Palestine Liberation Front: in George Habash’s words the development
and unity of the «democratic and revolutionary current» was the «security
valve for the treatment of the PLO crisis» (Al-Hadaf 1984k, pp. 7-12).

4 Conclusion: The Preparation of the 17th PNC and the Failure
of Coalition Politics
4.1

The Fatah-Democratic Alliance Negotiations and the ‘Aden Agreement’

Since the beginning of the year, the whole Palestinian national movement
was mainly focused on internal politics and on the preparation of the 17th
session of the Palestine National Council. The PFLP and other opposition
factions were aware of the importance of the next PNC, the one that would
seal the imposition or the rejection of the diplomatic strategy which the
chairman tried to undertake. In this framework the Democratic Alliance
was a tactical tool, and therefore a short-term entente, in order to safeguard the revolution from Arafat’s activism, with a view to the establishment of a larger national front «open to everybody without exception, to
every part who is ready to fight the deviationist approach and defeatism
in the Palestinian arena» (Al-Hadaf 1984k, p. 10).
In this new phase, PLO opposition was on a total defensive stance and its
political activity was limited to the reaction to the activities of the leadership: on the one hand Arafat and his supporters were interested in holding
the next PNC as quickly as possible, on the other, the Democratic Alliance
was seeking to gain time in order to reach some guarantees on the content and the focus of the discussions, before convening the council. For
instance, the Joint Command conditioned its participation to the PNC to
preliminary meetings that would define the «right political line with no
space for interpretations» (Al-Hadaf 1984k, pp. 11-12), as on the contrary
was the case for the 16th PNC. Furthermore Abu Ali Mustafa explained
in a public intervention at the end of April 1984, that the council could
not be convened without the «comprehensive political and organizational
agreement» of every PLO faction. Such a consensus was the only condition
capable to preserve the integrity of the PLO and prevent the split toward
which the leadership was leading the national movement (Al-Hadaf 1984e,
Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness89

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

p. 9). This demand also revealed PFLP’s attachment to the traditional PLO
consensus-policy as a mean to stop or at least to reduce the weight of Arafat’s initiative on the Palestinian arena: a further signal of the defensive
attitude adopted by the Democratic Alliance. In addition, PFLP’s Secretary
General explained that in order to «defend the legality» of the PLO, the
Party was ready to resort to the boycott of the Executive Committee. If
Fatah Central Committee had continued to back «the deviationist line»
the Democratic Alliance would prevent «Arafat to speak for the PLO» by
refraining its delegates to take part to Executive Committee activities:
deprived of six members the committee would be unable to represent the
Palestinian people. Actually, the card of quitting the main PLO institutions,
had already been played by the PFLP as happened in September 1974,
when the Front withdrawn from the Executive Committee to oppose PLO
mainstream acceptance of the ‘mini-State’ on the West Bank and Gaza
as a goal for the Palestinian national movement. In both cases the PFLP
intended such step as a measure to avoid sharing the responsibility of
«deviation and surrender» (Cobban 1984, p. 149), but at the same time, in
both cases it was a clear sing of powerlessness: in the mid-Seventies only
the precipitation of the Lebanese situation stopped Arafat’s path toward
negotiations with the enemy and again, despite a larger section of the PLO
did not take part in the 17th PNC, as it will be shown, PFLP action apparently did not affect Fatah’s strategy and only external events thwarted his
effort of coordination with Jordan.
Despite the unprecedented split that the national movement was facing
during this phase, usual preliminary talks between the Democratic Alliance
and Fatah started in Aden and Algiers in spring 1984: for two months the
delegations of PLO mainstream and of the so-called democratic forces negotiated the conditions for the convening of the Council without reaching
any concrete result. The Democratic Alliance was asking the implementation
of its plan of reforms as well as demanded a full national consensus which
should include also those factions which took up arms against Arafat, now
united in the «National Alliance». The Fatah representatives repeatedly
declared their will to condition the opening of PNC works to a preliminary
national consensus but Arafat for its part, adamantly pursued its strategy of
dialogue with Egypt and Jordan and did not restrain from public declarations
that angered both the Democratic Alliance and the Syrian-controlled radicals
of the National Alliance (Arafat, Malley 1984, pp. 180-183). The PFLP started
to overtly call for the «downfall» of PLO chairman as he was now completely
committed to its «deviationist line» (Al-Hadaf 1984f, pp. 4-5).
Nevertheless contacts between the contending parts continued and, surprisingly, at the last round of talks held in Aden in May 1984, an agreement
was reached (Aden-Algiers agreement). The leftist opposition renounced to
its call for Arafat’s immediate ouster but, on the other hand, obtained some
formal concessions namely, the opposition to any delegation of representa90

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

tion to Jordan, the condemnation of Hussein’s attempts to undermine the
PLO as sole representative, the ‘correction’ of the relations with Syria and
a concrete commitment to the development of an effective collective leadership inside the PLO, to limit Arafat’s authoritarianism. At this regard, the
Democratic Alliance was satisfied about the new control tasks appointed
to the Central Council which now could «call the Executive Committee to
account of its implementation of the decisions of the National Council» as
well as set the creation by the Council of «permanent, effective committees
composed by all member of the National Council» (Fatah, DemocraticAlliance 1984, pp. 200-204; Al-Hadaf 1984a, pp. 8-10).

4.2 The Convocation of the 17th PNC in Amman: The Seal of Arafat’s Primacy
Although the new agreement was supposed to start a «comprehensive national dialogue» it soon received many attacks leaving little chance to its
implementation. On the one hand, Arafat continued to state his will to go
further on the way of dialogue with Jordan and Egypt while, on the other,
the National Alliance saw the Aden-Algiers agreement as demagogic and
accused the Democratic Alliance for abandoning the commitment to PLO
reform and the restoration of the revolutionary line within the Organization.
The Democratic Alliance was stuck between the brand new approach
emerged with Arafat’s activism, who was trying to bypass the internal
opposition through a broader entente with Jordan and Egypt, and a radical small opposition committed to full rebellion and totally in the hands
of Syria. Furthermore some contrasts started to appear also inside the
Democratic Alliance: divergences emerged especially about the position
to adopt vis-à-vis Arafat, after the signing of the agreements. The PFLP
labeled reports about disagreement with the DFLP as «rumors» but actually was not allowed to issue a reminder to Fatah Central Committee on
measures to be taken against Arafat on behalf of the Democratic Alliance.
The Democratic and the Popular Fronts did not share exactly the same view
on the matter and although this was a small event, it showed the ‘tactical’
nature of the alliance between two forces that sometimes had also opposed
opinions on important issues (Al-Hadaf 1984h, pp. 6-18).
At the end of summer 1984 the impasse inside the PLO reached its climax, the national dialogue, that the agreements were supposed to start,
was paralyzed: every faction was contributing to this paralysis and despite
the PFLP and the DFLP continued to claim their adherence to the accords
vis-à-vis Arafat’s violation and Fatah Central Committee inability to refrain
its chairman, they started to demand the deferment of the 17th session of
the PNC, although in Aden they agreed on convening it in mid-September.
First, the PFLP argued that both holding a PNC with the exclusion of National Alliance forces, as demanded by Fatah and abandoning the legitiLeopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness91

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

macy of PLO praxis in order to revolt against the leadership and topple
Arafat as the National Alliance was asking, would consecrate the final
fragmentation and the end of the PLO as an effective actor in the region.
Afterwards, the review of the relations with Syria became a top priority:
for the PFLP, 1985 was likely to be a «hot year» in which another military
confrontation with Israel in Lebanon could occur. In addition, this dangerous phase demanded to put apart any difference and unify around major
issues, namely the opposition to the international defeatist plan. Convening
the PNC before reaching a solution concerning relations with Syria would
worsen the current crisis (Al-Hadaf 1984g, pp. 4-5).
Clearly this latter and other among PFLP’s claims, were mainly a consequence of Syria’s pressure on the whole Democratic Alliance. Actually,
the Alliance’s call for the safeguard of PLO unity during the debate that
preceded the PNC was in contradiction with its will to include the National
Alliance in the dialogue while, the latter, was first of all committed to Arafat’s deposition and to the creation of an alternative Palestinian platform.
In October 1984 the implementation of the Aden-Algiers agreements was
completely blocked while Arafat and the Syrian clients of the National
Alliance were putting the PLO on its way towards the split. Finally, at the
beginning of November, the break was made official: the Fatah Central
Committee decided to convene the 17th session of the Palestine National
Council out of the framework of the Aden-Algiers agreements for the 22nd
of the same month, and moreover it decided to hold it in Amman, for the
first time since 1970 Black September. By convening the PNC, Arafat sanctioned PLO new course: the one where the principle of majority prevailed
on the principle of consensus in the decision-making progress. He exploited
the paralysis provoked by the insistence of the Democratic Alliance to make
his line pass through legitimate PLO institution (Sayigh 1989, pp. 255-257).
PFLP’s Political Bureau held an emergency meeting shortly after the
official call of the PNC and issued an independent statement. The Popular
Front bitterly condemned this «individualist» step which was about to realize the worst threat to PLO’s survival: Arafat was officially sanctioning
the split in the national movement in a moment when «imperialist efforts»
were «focused on the crystallization of a reactionary axes» and needed the
«Palestinian coverage» to succeed. Ironically, Fatah made its step while a
delegation of the Democratic Alliance was heading to Tunis in order to hold
further talks meant to overcome the crisis. The party finally declared its
dissociation and rejection vis-à-vis this decision as well as called all parties
and personalities opposed to the deviationist line and its «destructive consequences» to concretely start a comprehensive dialogue and to make all
possible efforts to prevent the PNC to take place (Al-Hadaf 1984i, pp. 4-11).
However, PFLP’s efforts to thwart the holding of the PNC were vain,
and Fatah managed to convene the council though a considerable part of
the PLO decided to boycott the session. All the factions of the Democratic
92

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

Alliance did not take part to the PNC but the leftist coalition was about to
finish, especially the experience of the Joint Command with the DFLP. Actually, the DFLP decided to freeze its participation to the Joint Command as
it was disappointed with PFLP’s stubbornness in seeking a dialogue with
PLO’s rebels and held its former ally responsible for the failure of the talks
with Fatah Central Committee (Al-Hadaf 1984j, pp. 4-6).
Once the 17th PNC concluded, the Popular Front was defeated on every
front: its incapability to endorse a defined stand and to resist multiple
sources of pressure drove the Party to a de-facto inaction from which it
emerged sharply weakened. The project of union of all leftist forces failed
because the Front was unable to definitively dismiss the National Alliance
and formulate a better coordination with the Democratic Front, which
leaned closer to Fatah. The lack of ability, or will, to distance itself from
Syria’s agenda for the PLO discredited the Front inside the Palestinian
national movement and left more space to Arafat’s strategy. The PLO chairman for its part, benefitted from this situation and pursued with strength
the way of coordination with Jordan and Egypt, without seeking a settlement with the internal opposition. In the following years, despite the fall
of the Hussein-Arafat agreement and the disruption of the first Intifada,
the PFLP was unable to recover the advantage and the power acquired
by Yasser Arafat between 1982 and 1984. The Front managed to play an
active role during the unprecedented uprising exploded in the Occupied
Territories in December 1987 but the keys of PLO decision-making were
completely in the hands of Fatah’s leader which could not be restrained by
any means through PLO institutions. The marginalization of Habash’s party
appeared definitive as also the Islamist current emerged with strength,
during the Nineties in particular, the Palestinian political arena was polarized between Fatah, and the newly created Islamic Resistance Movement
(Hamas) leaving no room for the traditional secular leftist opposition.

Bibliography
Primary Sources
Al-Hadaf (1983a). Barnāmağ al-waḥda wa al-iṣlāḥ ad-dimuqrāṭī fī munaẓẓama
at-taḥrīr al-filasṭīniyya (Program of unity and democratic reform in the
Palestine Liberation Organization). 695, 24 October.
Al-Hadaf (1984a). Muḥaḍḍir liqā’ ‘aden (Report of the Aden Meeting). 730, 16 July.
Al-Hadaf (1983b). 657, 24 January.
Al-Hadaf (1983c). 661, 21 February.
Al-Hadaf (1983d). 662, 28 February.
Al-Hadaf (1983e). 669, 18 April.
Al-Hadaf (1983f). 670, 25 April.
Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness93

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

Al-Hadaf (1983g). 672, 9 May.
Al-Hadaf (1983h). 673, 16 May.
Al-Hadaf (1983i). 704, 26 December.
Al-Hadaf (1984b). 705, 2 January.
Al-Hadaf (1984c). 707, 16 January.
Al-Hadaf (1984d). 717, 2 April.
Al-Hadaf (1984e). 721, 30 April.
Al-Hadaf (1984f). 722, 14 May.
Al-Hadaf (1984g). 739, 24 September.
Al-Hadaf (1984h). 740, 1 October.
Al-Hadaf (1984i). 747, 19 November.
Al-Hadaf (1984j). 748, 26 November.
Al-Hadaf (1984k). 718, 9 April.
Arafat, Yasser; Malley, Simon (1984). «Yasser Arafat Interviewed». Journal
of Palestine Studies, 14 (1), pp. 179-183.
Fatah, Democratic-Alliance (1984). «Aden-Algiers Agreement Between
Fateh Central Committee and the Palestinian Democratic Alliance».
Journal of Palestine Studies, 14 (1), pp. 194-215.
PFLP et al. (1984). «Statement Issued by the Joint Command of the Democratic and Popular Fronts, the Palestine Liberation Front and the Palestine Communist Party, Calling for a Collective Leadership». Journal
of Palestine Studies, 13 (4), pp. 199-221.
PFLP Information Department (1983). At-taqrīr as-siyāsī aṣ-ṣādir ‘an allağna al-markaziyya fī dawratihā ar-raābi“a ḥawla ḥarb Lubnān - The
political report issued by the fourth general assembly of PFLP’s Central
Committee on the war of Lebanon 1983. Damascus: PFLP Information
Department.
PFLP Information Department (1972). Task of the New stage: The Political
Report of the Third National Congress of PFLP. Beirut.
PFLP-DFLP (1983a). «PFLP-DFLP Joint Communique on the Latest Developments on Palestinian and Arab Levels». Journal of Palestine Studies, 13 (1), pp. 219-239.
PFLP-DFLP (1983b). «PFLP-DFLP Joint Statement on the Formation of a
Joint Political and Military Command». Journal of Palestine Studies, 13
(1), pp. 219-239.

Secondary Sources
AbuKhalil, As’ad (1987). «Internal Contradictions in the PFLP: Decision
Making and Policy Orientation». Middle East Journal, 41 (3), pp. 361-378.
Abu-Lughod, Ibrahim (1983). «Flexible Militancy: A Report on the Sixteenth Session of the Palestine National Council, Algiers, February 1422, 1983». Journal of Palestine Studies, 12 (4), pp. 25-40.
94

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

Al-Hout, Shafik (2009). «Arafat and the Journey of the Palestinian Revolutio: An Interview with Shafiq Al Hout». Journal of Palestine Studies, 39
(1), pp. 45-57.
Al-Kubeisi, Basil (1977). Storia del Movimento dei Nazionalisti Arabi,
Milano: Jaca Books.
Barut, Muhammad Jamal (1997). Harakat al-Qawmiyyin al-’Arab: Al-Nash’a,
al-Tatawwur, al-Masa’ir - The Arab Nationalist Movement: Formation,
Evolution and Destinies. Damascus: al-Markaz al-’Arabi lil-Dirasat alIstratijiyy.
Cobban, Helena (1984). The Palestinian Liberation Organisation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cubert, Harold (1997). The PFLP’s Changing Role in the Middle East. London: Frank Cass.
Freedman, Robert, 1987. «Soviet Policy toward the Middle East». Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science, 36 (4), pp. 176-197.
Golan, Galia (1983). The Soviet Union and the Israeli Action in Lebanon.
International Affairs, 59 (1), pp. 7-16.
Golan, Galia (1986). «The Soviet Union and the PLO since the War in
Lebanon». Middle East Journal, 40 (2), pp. 285-305.
Gresh, Alain (1988). The PLO: The Struggle Within. London: Zed Books.
Harris, Lillian (1977). «China’s Relations with the PLO». Journal of Palestine Studies, 7 (1), pp. 123-154.
Hilal, Jamil (2009). Al-yasār al-filasṭīnī. ‘ilā ‘ayna? (The Palestinian Left:
Where to?). Ramallah: Rosa Luxemburg Foundation.
Hinnebusch, Raymond (1986). «Syrian Policy in Lebanon and the Palestinians». Arab Studies Quaterly, 8 (1), pp. 1-20.
Ismael, Tariq (2005). The Communist Movement in the Arab World. Oxon:
Routledge Curzon.
Kazziha, Walid (1975). Revolutionary Transformation in the Arab World:
Habash and His Comrades from Nationalism to Marxism. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.
Khalidi, Rashid (1983). «Behind the Fateh Rebellion». MERIP Reports, 119,
pp. 6-12.
Khalidi, Rashid (1985a). «Lebanon in the Context of Regional Politics: Palestinian and Syrian Involvement in the Lebanese Crisis». Third World
Quarterly, 7 (3), pp. 495-514.
Khalidi, Rashid (1985b). «The Palestinian Dilemma: PLO Policy After Lebanon» [online]. Journal of Palestine Studies, 15 (1), pp. 88-103. Available
at http://www.jstor.org/stable/2536578 (2014-09-26).
Ladadwe, Hassan (2014). «The Palestinian Left: Reallity and Challenges - Al-Yasār al-filasṭīnī: al-wāqi‘ wa at-taḥaddī». In: Hilal, J.; Herman,
K. (eds.), Mapping of the Arab Left: Contemporary Leftist Politics in the
Arab East - ‘iṭlāla ’awalliyya ’alā al-yasār fī-l-mašriq al-‘arabī. Ramallah:
Rosa Luxemburg Foundation.
Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness95

Annali di Ca’ Foscari, 50, ﻿2014, pp. 75-96

ISSN 2385-3042

Rouleau, Eric (1983). «The Future of the PLO». Foreign Affairs, 62 (1),
pp. 138-156.
Rouleau, Eric; Paul, Jim; Stork, Joe (1983). «The Mutiny against Arafat».
MERIP Reports, 119, pp. 13-16.
Sahliyeh, Emile (1986). The PLO after the Lebanon War. Boulder (CO):
Westview Press.
Sayigh, Yezid (1997). Armed Struggle and the Search for State: The Palestinian National Movement, 1949-1993. Oxford: Claredon Press.
Sayigh, Yezid (1989). «Struggle within, Struggle without: The Transformation of PLO Politics since 1982». International Affairs, 65 (2), pp. 247-271.
Tse-Tung, Mao (1967). Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung, vol. 1. Beijing:
Foreign Language Press.

96

Leopardi. ‘Coalition Politics’ and Regional Steadfastness

