Resisting Neoliberal Homogenization
The Zapatista Autonomy Movement
by
Richard Stahler-Sholk

The Zapatista autonomy movement in Chiapas, Mexico, is a significant example of rising social-movement resistance to neoliberalism. The neoliberal project in Latin America
since the 1980s has led to a retrenchment of the state, opening new space for social movements to contest power from below. In Mexico, the weakening of corporatist and clientelist
mechanisms once controlled by the party-state allowed groups like the Zapatistas to assert
rights based on both collective (ethnic) identity and Mexican national citizenship. An examination of the Zapatista autonomy movement since 1994 suggests several dilemmas: (1) A
territorially based model of autonomy as administrative decentralization would not fundamentally alter existing political hierarchies or the role of the state as broker for global capital. (2) Autonomy conceived as mere disengagement would leave autonomous communities
cut off from resources and unprotected from the forces of the global market. (3) Autonomy
defined as simply cultural pluralism falls into the neoliberal “multiculturalism trap” of
atomizing communities, substituting formal “equality” for the power to establish collective
identities and demand substantive rights. The Zapatistas have maneuvered around counterinsurgency and co-optation through a flexible, community-based model of autonomy,
shifting in 2003 to a model of regional Juntas de Buen Gobierno with rotating representatives to integrate the resistance. The experiment holds lessons for other social movements
in Latin America struggling to preserve grassroots decision making in opposition to the
logic of global capital.
Keywords:

Zapatista, Mexico, Social movements, Autonomy, Neoliberalism

In the documentary ¡Zapatista! there is a scene in which the ski-masked
Subcomandante Marcos tells the camera that the rebels rose up against the
Mexican government in 1994 only to discover that the Mexican government
didn’t exist; instead, they found themselves fighting against the structures of
global capital.1 Social movements do not literally resist neoliberalism; they
resist a specific landlord’s hired guns trying to drive them off the land they
need for subsistence or a specific agency that privatizes their water supply
and triples the rates. In Mexico they resist a golf course in Tepoztlán, an airport in San Salvador Atenco, a Costco in Cuernavaca—all local and concrete
manifestations of a global logic that disempowers people who lack capital and
ignores their right to establish their own priorities. A growing number of
movements in Latin America are engaging in innovative organizing against
the injustices of the neoliberal paradigm (Gills, 2000), departing from the revolutionary focus on seizing state power (Foran, 2003). Privatization, fiscal austerity, and economic liberalization have resulted in the contraction and
Richard Stahler-Sholk is an associate professor of political science at Eastern Michigan
University and an associate editor of Latin American Perspectives.
LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES, Issue 153, Vol. 34 No. 2, March 2007 48-63
DOI: 10.1177/0094582X06298747
© 2007 Latin American Perspectives

48

Stahler-Sholk / RESISTING NEOLIBERAL HOMOGENIZATION

49

redeployment of the state, shifting the locus of political struggles away from
direct contestation for state power and opening new spaces to contestation (by
new movements and old) over whether they will be controlled from above or
below.
The Mexican state acts increasingly as a broker for global capital as it attempts
to re-regulate the conditions for accumulation on a global scale. Neoliberalism
involves not simply a headlong retreat of the state but rather a renegotiation of
state-society relations. The attempted recomposition of capitalist hegemony
included targeted social compensation programs such as the National Solidarity
Program—PRONASOL. These somewhat contradictory efforts to create a reformulated clientelism for the neoliberal era (Hellman, 1994)—one more selective
and flexible than the old corporatist structures had allowed—did not entirely
succeed in shielding the dominant-party form of the Mexican authoritarian state
from political change. The shift from state-orchestrated to market mechanisms of
distribution overlapped with new forms of social-movement-based struggles,
ranging from the debtors’ movement El Barzón to independent unions and
neighborhood associations (Williams, 2001; Otero, 2004). As the turn to the
market left state authorities in control of fewer resources for co-optation, increasingly independent social sectors formulated their demands not in terms of clientelistic expectations but in terms of citizenship rights (Fox, 1997). This discourse
of rights is characteristic of the newly constituted social subjects confronting
neoliberalism throughout Latin America by simultaneously claiming indigenous
and other collective rights that markets deny and the citizenship rights that the
neoliberal state pretends to offer equally to all (Eckstein and Wickham-Crowley,
2003). The Zapatistas organize in newly contested spaces paradoxically created
by neoliberal globalization itself (Stahler-Sholk, 2001), joining independent peasant and liberation-theology organizing that predated the neoliberal era (Harvey,
1998).
The forces of globalization that affect class relations are experienced (and
resisted) through a variety of locally relevant identities, including ethnicity
and gender (Nash, 2001; Yashar, 2005). In Chiapas, elaborate structures of
labor control were constructed in the centuries after colonization by grafting
them onto co-opted “traditional” religious/civic hierarchies in indigenous
communities. Changes in the global political economy of post-1982 (oil/debt
shock) Mexico were experienced locally as community power struggles that
went to the core of what it meant to be part of the indigenous community
(Collier, 1994; Rus, 1995). The state regularly mediated private capitalist development initiatives (e.g., logging operations in the Lacandón Jungle in the second half of the twentieth century) by reinventing indigenous identities and
lines of authority in ways that facilitated the particular strategy of capital
accumulation (De Vos, 2002). Resistance to neoliberalism, then, has taken the
form of a movement for autonomy, with the protagonists struggling for the
right to define themselves culturally, socially, and politically.

THE POTENTIAL AND THE PITFALLS OF AUTONOMY
Social movements by definition operate outside conventional politics, and
“new” social movements are distinguished by their emphasis on autonomy,

50

LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES

participatory process, and solidarity around perceived collective identities.
The neoliberal project implies atomization and loss of control to global market
forces, posing dilemmas for movements seeking to reassert community identity and grassroots empowerment. On one hand, the “fetishism of autonomy”
(Hellman, 1992)—eschewing affiliation or engagement with any political
structure for fear that it might absorb the newly asserted identity—can be a
dead end. On the other hand, negotiating a share of power with existing political institutions runs the risk of replicating dominant hierarchies (serving
global capital) and distancing the “autonomous” representatives from their
social bases. Movements in Mexico and elsewhere experiment and debate
over how best to conceive of autonomy (Díaz-Polanco and Sánchez, 2002).
Zapatismo as a social movement consists of various layers, including the
political-military structure (insurgents and militia) of the Ejército Zapatista de
Liberación Nacional (Zapatista National Liberation Army—EZLN) that went
public in 1994, the “networks” of national and international supporters, and
the “support-base” indigenous communities in the “conflict zones” (eastern
jungle, border, northern zone, and central highlands) of Chiapas. I will focus
on the support-base communities to consider the sustainability of the movement, highlighting three dilemmas: (1) the limits of territorially based autonomy, (2) autonomy and curtailment of resource allocations, and (3) the
neoliberal “multiculturalism trap.”
One model of autonomy, drawing on the experience of the Nicaraguan
Atlantic region, proposed a regionally based self-governance that would
amount to a kind of territorial decentralization negotiated with the state. This
model was actually under construction in parts of the jungle region prior to
the 1994 Zapatista uprising, particularly in areas of predominantly Tojolabal
settlement, in the form of Regiones Autónomas Pluriétnicas (Pluriethnic
Autonomous Regions—RAP). This approach in effect created a new, fourth
level of government (alongside the federal, state, and municipal institutions)
and constructed a new “pluriethnic” indigenous identity among the various
indigenous groups that had formed part of the migrant stream settling the
Lacandón Jungle agricultural frontier of eastern Chiapas since the 1950s.
The RAP project of autonomy-as-decentralization was accelerated by its
promoters in the space created by the Zapatista rebellion, advancing faster
among its leadership than the creation of consensus within its diverse base. It
therefore suffered from tendencies toward cacicazgo or “boss” politics as well
as from the competing, more local identities of the ejidos reflecting the political economy of rural Mexico (Mattiace, 2003: 95–111). Critics of the RAP,
including some academic advisers to the Zapatistas, argued that such territorial jurisdiction, acquired at the cost of being subsumed within the existing
state structures, was only pseudo-autonomy (Esteva, 2003: 252–253). The
Zapatistas themselves, who preferred a model of autonomy that built from
the community level upward, remained open to a kind of pluralism of
autonomies—“a world in which many worlds can fit”—that did not force a
choice between autonomy models.
One of the pitfalls of the territorial or parochial interpretation of autonomy—
whether in Chiapas, Guatemala, or Ecuador—is that it bottles up the protagonists in a spatial location precisely in an era when their subsistence and cultural
identity depend on mobility (Colloredo-Mansfeld, 2002). The exploitation of

Stahler-Sholk / RESISTING NEOLIBERAL HOMOGENIZATION

51

indigenous communities has often revolved around elites exchanging a territorially bounded degree of local autonomy (for example, in “traditional” highland communities in Chiapas) for a controlled flow of migratory labor,
historically to the Soconusco region within Chiapas (Rus, 1995) but increasingly in the past decade to the United States. Chiapas soared from twenty-seventh to eleventh place among Mexican states in remittances from 1995 to 2004,
reinforcing the local power of caciques dominating the transit and moneylending businesses.2 This formulation of autonomy may therefore not represent a real alternative to neoliberal globalization but rather replicate the
top-down structure of existing political institutions without developing new
leadership capacity at the local community level. The Zapatistas have
eschewed such regionally based formulations of autonomy in favor of the
community-based model—which proved to have some tactical advantages
when the Mexican military attempted to encircle and close the noose around
the Lacandón Jungle region of Zapatista core support in December 1994, the
first year of the rebellion. It was then that the Zapatistas popped up in 38 selfproclaimed “autonomous municipalities,” many of them located outside the
region of military encirclement.
A second dilemma relates to resource allocation. The Zapatistas have been
careful to distinguish themselves from secessionist movements and insist on
framing their demands as rights claimed on the basis of indigenous ethnic
identity and Mexican national citizenship. However, the same neoliberal ideology that “frees” individuals to fend for themselves in the market can also
spin off unprofitable state functions and services that used to be part of the citizenship compact. The market paradigm privatizes gains while socializing
costs and risks. Thus social sectors and regions may be cut loose as newly
autonomous without state resources, free to compete with each other for a
share of the shrinking pie. For example, when the PRI party-controlled corporatist apparatus of resource distribution started to be slashed by the neoliberal
austerity ax in the 1980s, it was partly replaced by more modest social compensation programs such as PRONASOL (and later PROCAMPO and PROGRESA, the latter reconfigured as the “Oportunidades” program by President
Vicente Fox) that were more open to claimants independent of the ruling
party. Yet this seeming recognition of autonomous spaces in society turned out
to be a new mechanism for division and co-optation (Collier, 1994). As a wider
range of groups competed for scarcer state resources, they became vulnerable
to clientelistic local politicians and, for that matter, to paternalistic NGOs
moving into the breach.
An example of this “autonomy without resources” pitfall can be seen in the
Mexican agrarian counterreform inaugurated by the 1992 reform of Article 27
of the 1917 Constitution. Peasant rights to petition collectively for land were
ended, and the existing ejido social-property sector (previously protected
from the market) would now be susceptible to individual parcelization and
titling under the PROCEDE program. This was touted as “freeing” individual
members of ejidos to pull out their separate parcels of land and put up the
titles as collateral for loans or eventually to sell the land. Of course, after
decades of public infrastructural investment bestowed on private large-scale
agribusiness, the 1989 dismantling of the state coffee-marketing board

52

LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES

Instituto Mexicano del Café (Mexican Coffee Institute—INMECAFE) and
post-NAFTA competition from U.S.-subsidized agribusiness products such as
corn entering the market, those “free” choices of peasant producers were
shaped by major structural constraints. In Chiapas, a state with 4 percent of
the population but 27 percent of the backlog of unresolved land reform claims
by 1992, poor peasants saw the reform of Article 27 not as rural modernization
but rather as the removal of their last hope for subsistence security, leading
many to shift from other independent peasant organizations to the ranks of
the Zapatista rebellion (Harvey, 1998).
In developing an autonomy model entailing separation from government
programs, the Zapatistas, in order to sustain a social movement, faced the
challenge of offering resources (land, social programs) to their support-base
communities. This was complicated by the fact that it was often nonZapatistas who benefited materially from the opening created by the rebellion, for example, in the surge of land invasions/recoveries after 1994.
Rejecting official aid in order to expose government hypocrisy implied shortterm sacrifice for a longer-term political strategy—resistance in the Gramscian
sense of developing counterhegemonic ideology in a war of position. This
effort was in practice often ambiguous, as Zapatistas and non-Zapatistas were
interspersed territorially and even within villages.3 The boundaries of
Zapatismo as a social movement “in resistance” were also blurred by the fact
that many non-Zapatistas also resisted programs like PROCEDE that undermined ejidos and indigenous communities, viewing them as a threat to an
important source of community and social capital. In a conversation on the
Zapatista caravan from Chiapas to Mexico City in March 2001, a long-time
activist from the Organización Campesina Emiliano Zapata (OCEZ) worried
that individuals pulling their parcels out of the ejido would drain the communally managed social investment fund, undermining the collective process
of deciding on priorities for the community’s well-being. An elderly
Purépecha woman on another leg of the caravan expressed analogous concerns about PROCAMPO (the temporary per-hectare compensation for the
elimination of crop subsidies). She suspected that signing up for a payment
associated with a particular plot of land was a little bit like selling rights to the
land. This kind of struggle for community control against the atomizing force
of the market is the basis for the Zapatista notions of autonomy. Ironically, the
Article 27 reforms were coupled with reforms to Article 4 of the Constitution
for the first time explicitly recognizing the multiethnic character of the
Mexican nation. Both were criticized by independent peasant and indigenous
rights organizations as top-down, nonparticipatory initiatives. Their juxtaposition illustrates the way the neoliberal model recognizes the pluralism of
indigenous identities as long as those identities do not become the basis for
collective organization around substantive rights.
This leads to the third observation about the dilemmas of autonomous
movements confronting neoliberalism. The neoliberal project in Latin America
is being tweaked to include “managed neoliberal multiculturalism” (Hale,
2002). The same states that oversee economic liberalization and privatization
are establishing themselves as arbiters of the boundary between individual
and group rights, carefully circumscribing the latter to exclude challenges to

Stahler-Sholk / RESISTING NEOLIBERAL HOMOGENIZATION

53

class-based inequalities. In the case of Chiapas, the only topic area in the peace
talks following the 1994 Zapatista rebellion that led to a signed agreement was
the negotiation over indigenous rights and culture, which led to the San
Andrés Accords of 1996. The accords conceded state recognition of usos y costumbres, the normative system of decision-making authority through which
indigenous communities traditionally governed themselves. For the
Zapatistas, this was a fundamental victory for community-based autonomy.
Yet it soon became clear that the Mexican government regarded the systems of
community assemblies and assignments of duties as merely a quaint vestigial
practice frozen in time, unrelated to contemporary struggles over land and
resources. The implementing legislation for the San Andrés Accords became
bogged down in five years of government delays and redrafting, until finally
the multiparty Congressional Commission for Concord and Pacification
(Comisión de Concordia y Pacificación—COCOPA) put forward a compromise, watered-down text. When the Zapatistas reluctantly accepted the
COCOPA draft indigenous law, the federal government backed away from
that too, returning with a new version that totally stripped the substantive
rights components from the San Andrés agreement. This was the backdrop for
the Zapatistas’ March 2001 caravan from Chiapas to Mexico City, culminating
in Comandante Esther’s historic address to the Congress. When they had
returned home, however, the government introduced its gutted version of the
“indigenous rights law,” which passed despite being denounced by every
major indigenous and human rights organization and voted down in all the
states with large indigenous populations (Stahler-Sholk, 2005). At the same
time, the administrations of President Vicente Fox and Chiapas Governor
Pablo Salazar promoted an ostentatious brand of neoindigenismo that included
co-opting prominent indigenous professionals into new bureaucratic structures, sponsoring community-development-cum-counterinsurgency, unilaterally creating new municipalities in indigenous areas, launching “intercultural
universities,” and rhetorically celebrating multicultural “inclusion” without
letting indigenous people define their own identities (Hernández, Paz, and
Sierra, 2004).
In the process of this debate between the top-down and bottom-up versions
of indigenous rights, the Zapatistas sponsored participatory forums in an
effort to link the struggle for autonomy in Chiapas to a broader social movement. This mobilization of support included the Congreso Nacional Indígena
(National Indigenous Congress—CNI), part of a new national indigenous
movement awakened in part by the Zapatista rebellion. The CNI rejected the
officialist indigenous rights law, as did the United Nations special rapporteur
for human rights and indigenous questions, the Mexican anthropologist
Rodolfo Stavenhagen, who noted that the law violated Convention 169 of the
International Labor Organization (ILO) on indigenous rights (which Mexico
had signed in 1990) by bypassing popular consultation. He also reiterated the
critique by the Mexican Academy of Human Rights that the law empowered
state legislatures to supersede anything enacted by indigenous communities.
A further example of this neoliberal multiculturalism trap can be seen in
President Fox’s Plan Puebla-Panamá (PPP), a multibillion-dollar scheme of proposed massive infrastructural investment in southern Mexico to incorporate the

54

LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES

region into the global market. In contrast to previous development schemes,
the PPP ostensibly acknowledges the marginalization of indigenous populations of the Mexican South, using the language of sustainable development
(Nash, 2003: 81–87) to promote what local communities denounce as
biopiracy—commodifying and commercializing the biodiversity and other
resources of this region. Even the multiculturalism of the indigenous populations is identified as a marketable asset for ecotourism. Yet indigenous communities that practice self-sufficient production and resist being converted
into a Disneyfied, homogenized “Maya region” are accused of inefficiency or,
worse yet, of sabotaging the development rights of other indigenous groups
(i.e., of not being multicultural enough).
The Zapatistas, rather than bargaining for a limited version of territorially
based autonomy within a federal model, have insisted on the right of each community to develop its own network of relations. Rather than accepting the state’s
power to define the boundaries between individual and collective rights, they
have insisted on a concept of ethnic citizenship (Harvey, 1998; Nash, 2001) that
claims rights of Mexican citizenship and indigenous social identity, consistent
with the broader hemispheric resurgence of indigenous movements (Yashar,
2005). This diverse interpretation of autonomy defies easy classification, and the
Zapatistas have had limited success in generating a national political movement.
Yet the resiliency of the Zapatista resistance in the face of massive counterinsurgency and “development” policies has made it a powerful symbol and an invitation to develop alternatives to the logic of global capital.

STRUGGLES FOR AUTONOMY IN THE ZAPATISTA COMMUNITIES
The Zapatista autonomy movement has developed in several phases, following the changing political dynamic of the rebellion. Burguete (2003) identifies
the first three phases: The first began in December 1994 in response to the government’s attempted military encirclement of what they assumed to be the
Zapatista stronghold, the Cañadas (canyons), and spread through the Lacandón
Jungle in the eastern part of the state (the agricultural frontier that had experienced swelling colonization by mainly indigenous poor peasants since the
1950s). Defying the encirclement, the Zapatistas announced their organized
presence in 38 municipalities that included a good part of the central highlands,
formalizing this proclamation of autonomy with the EZLN’s January 1995 Third
Declaration from the Lacandón Jungle.4 A second phase, following the February
1996 signing of the San Andrés Accords, began in October 1996, when Zapatistas
boycotted municipal elections and refused to recognize the officially elected
authorities, instead following indigenous usos y costumbres to choose leaders in
open community assemblies. This created in effect parallel structures of local
government. In a third phase after 1997, when it became clear that the government was reneging on the essential content of the San Andrés Accords, the
Zapatistas further institutionalized their de facto autonomous municipal governments and in many cases expelled the official governments. It was in this
period that the federal government launched joint police-military raids in AprilMay 1998 to dismantle the autonomous municipalities of Ricardo Flores Magón

Stahler-Sholk / RESISTING NEOLIBERAL HOMOGENIZATION

55

and Tierra y Libertad and the state government of Chiapas approved a remunicipalization creating seven new municipalities designed to undermine the
Zapatista autonomy claims. This was followed by a long period of accumulation
of forces that the Zapatistas called “strategic silence,” rebuilding local organizational networks under the noses of the occupying military forces—including
new headquarters for the raided municipalities. Yet this was also a period of
strained economic viability as coffee prices fell and government projects lured
away supporters. In August 2003, a fourth phase began when the Zapatistas
formed regional representative Juntas de Buen Gobierno (good-government councils) based in centers called caracoles (literally “conch shells,” a Mayan symbol)
(Stahler-Sholk, 2005). These replaced the former Aguascalientes centers, regional
multiservice centers for clusters of autonomous municipalities.
One of the challenges for the Zapatista project of community-based autonomy has been dealing with issues of pluralism and factionalism among the
communities. A variety of independent credit, marketing, and land rights
organizations had been organizing in the predominantly indigenous areas of
Chiapas since the 1970s, becoming increasingly radicalized in response to the
ravages of neoliberalism (Harvey, 1998). Zapatista clandestine organizing
efforts in this era intertwined with those of groups such as the Asociación
Rural de Interés Colectivo (Rural Collective Interest Association—ARIC), the
Unión de Uniones de Ejidos (Union of Ejido Unions—UU), religious catechists
mobilizing under the liberation-theology-inspired Bishop Samuel Ruiz, and a
rather elaborate local sociopolitical structure (the comón, or communal assembly) that had emerged in the no-man’s-land of the Cañadas settlements, essentially beyond the reach of the state (Leyva Solano, 2003).
In some cases, Zapatista affiliation became one more potential division that
community members had to negotiate. Where parallel autonomous and official government structures coexisted, conflicts between members of divided
communities sometimes produced jurisdictional disputes that escalated into
clashes between the competing authorities, which served as pretexts for coercive state intervention against the Zapatistas (Burguete, 2003: 211). Yet in other
divided communities, the specter of state intervention was enough to motivate direct negotiation of conflicts between the factionalized local governments (Stahler-Sholk, 1998: 69–71), creating an incipient autonomy from the
state that went beyond Zapatista affiliation. In one autonomous municipality,
authorities reported in 2005 that most of the disputes heard by their “Honor
and Justice Commission” were actually brought by non-Zapatistas, including
two paramilitaries after a drunken machete fight (interview, August 18, 2005).
Religion has also been a potential source of division that the Zapatista autonomy movement has had to negotiate carefully. Religious divisions had long
reflected local political conflicts, as both Catholic liberation theology and
Protestant denominations represented markers of separation from the “traditionalist” Catholic/cacique/Partido Revolucionario Institucional (Institutional
Revolutionary party—PRI) local power structures in indigenous communities
in Chiapas. The EZLN appealed to these escapees through a new unifying
identity that cut across lines of religious affiliation, validating class and
indigenous collective identities (Eber, 2003).
The Zapatista rebellion also placed indigenous communities in the position
of having to define their relation with the PRI, often an awkward choice in the

56

LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES

pre-2000 days when the party monopolized the state institutions and treasury.
The PRI’s famous patronage machinery was reinforced by the Mexican army’s
civic action (labor social) and later government programs in the conflict zones,
reinforcing divisions by offering handouts (despensas) of food and other basic
supplies only to PRI supporters. Even electricity was individually doled out
in some areas, with family-sized solar panel units for each thatched hut that
declared its officialist loyalties. In areas more distant from the military occupation in Chiapas such as the neighboring state of Oaxaca, such tactics reinforced a populist image of the PRI that allowed some peasant communities to
construct an identity for themselves in which they were both pro-PRI and proZapatista (Stephen, 1997). But in the conflict zones of Chiapas, where the lines
were sharper, the Zapatistas demanded a degree of sacrifice from communities that wanted to consider themselves “in resistance” in that they were
expected to reject government aid.
In practice, the community responses were mixed. One Cañadas community, returning from a month of refuge in the hills following the military’s illegal February 1995 offensive that broke the ceasefire, had scarcely begun to
clean up from the army’s looting and pillage when a helicopter appeared carrying Mexican congresspersons offering aid (see Stahler-Sholk, 1998: 68).5
After an open-air assembly while the busy legislators waited impatiently, the
members of the demolished community came back with the response that
they would refuse aid from the government that had just sent the army after
them. Instead they requested a withdrawal of the troops that were still
camped nearby. In another community in the Che Guevara Autonomous
Municipality, when a government health inspector arrived uninvited to check
for malaria cases, suddenly no one could speak Spanish. Afterward villages
expressed their suspicion that an earlier visit by a government vaccination
team had left women sterilized, a view that reflected their deep distrust of
“help” from the state. In the contested Montes Azules Biosphere Reserve near
the Guatemalan border—coveted by global capital for its biodiversity and
hydroelectric resources—government agencies launched an aggressive campaign beginning in 2002 to divide and evict communities, combining threats
with offers of resettlement land and resources. Settlements of Zapatista sympathizers that were newer (often displaced from other regions) and/or on the
political or geographic fringes of integration into the movement (e.g., the
geographically overextended Libertad de los Pueblos Maya Autonomous
Municipality) lacked a viable resistance strategy, and the Zapatistas preemptively relocated seven of them in 2004.
Self-reliant, sustainable development is an important challenge for the
Zapatista communities. Since 1994, they have developed a variety of selfsufficient production, exchange, and social service projects: collective garden
patches, rabbit raising, beekeeping, candle making, agroecology experimentation, locally controlled schools, networks of health promoters trained in combinations of traditional and modern healing, etc. Most of these started on a
small scale, but the development of the five Aguascalientes centers allowed
some coordination and planning beyond individual communities, including
boot-making and textile-weaving cooperatives (problematical in terms of
gender segregation, as the Zapatistas sought to draw on traditional identity

Stahler-Sholk / RESISTING NEOLIBERAL HOMOGENIZATION

57

but reinvent more egalitarian and less hierarchical traditions) and the regional
autonomous secondary school in the highlands center of Oventik. These
projects also built on indigenous traditions of a community labor tax, a pool
of person-days of labor to which each family contributed. These nonmarket
alternatives to the neoliberal model were an effort to create material conditions for the support-base communities to hold out while inspiring a broader
movement capable of changing state policies. The government sought to
break that independence by depriving communities of land (Nash, 2003: 80)
and otherwise isolating them.
Economic “autonomy” from the state and from the global market entailed
other trade-offs. The Zapatistas had to improvise a mode of relations with
NGOs to preserve community control. Since the 2003 creation of Juntas de
Buen Gobierno headquartered in five caracoles, the regional juntas and municipal autonomous councils review NGO projects to decide whether and on
what terms they can proceed (Earle and Simonelli, 2005) instead of letting
NGOs drive the development process, which could be just as divisive as
the government’s deliberate counterinsurgency aid. This has reinforced the
autonomous authorities’ legitimacy and participatory experience in selfgovernment. As the Zapatistas explained (Marcos, 2003: pt. 2):
It was a matter of time before people came to understand that the Zapatista
indigenous people had dignity and were not looking for alms, but rather respect.
. . . There is a more sophisticated kind of handout which is practiced by some
NGOs and international organizations. It consists more or less in their deciding
what the communities need and, without even consulting them, imposing not
just particular projects but also the timing and form of their execution. Imagine
the desperation of a community that needs potable water and instead is given a
library or needs a school for children and is given a course in herbiculture.

Where projects were established in specific communities, the Juntas sometimes charged a 10 percent tax for the region. The collective fund would create a
counterbalance to the uneven development that reflected the convenience and
preferences of NGO funders, reaffirming the concept of community empowerment. The Zapatistas would now have some modest revenues to respond to
needs and proposals emanating from the communities—an escape from the
“autonomy without resources” trap, though it meant defining self-sufficiency in
terms of wider networks of fair trade and solidarity. It also meant tightening the
criteria for Zapatista-affiliated communities “in resistance” (i.e., rejecting government aid), a trade-off that sacrificed some pluralism and flexibility in pushing
communities to define themselves as “in” or “out.” The new structure of the
caracoles—extending the movement into statelike functions—posed broader
questions of whether a social movement/rebellion/revolution must eventually
institutionalize and in the process lose some of its mobilizational impetus. The
Juntas included a governing council of two representatives from each of the
autonomous municipalities composing the region, who rotated every 10–15
days. This new dynamic logically entailed some trade-offs. The frequent rotation
of representatives fostered grassroots participation and accountability but perhaps at some cost of efficient continuity. The new task of regional representation
also required travel and extended shifts outside the community, which in light of

58

LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES

gender roles in the indigenous communities might reduce women’s participation in governance structures.
In reformulating the structure of community representation at the regional
level, the Zapatistas were explicitly cutting out the intermediary roles of both
the political-military apparatus of the EZLN itself and the self-appointed
leaders and organizations of civil society (Marcos, 2003: pt. 6):
The military structure of the EZLN “contaminated” in some ways a democratic
and self-governing tradition. The EZLN was, shall we say, one of the “antidemocratic” elements in a relation of direct community democracy. . . . Since the EZLN,
on principle, is not fighting to take power, none of the military leadership or
members of the Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee can occupy
positions of authority in the community or in the autonomous municipalities. . . .
Often dishonest people deceive national and international civil society by presenting themselves in the cities as “Zapatistas.”. . . Now it will just be a matter
of contacting one of the Juntas de Buen Gobierno . . . and in a matter of minutes
one can find out if it is true or not, and if he is a Zapatista or not.

This reaffirmation of the authority of the communities fit the Zapatista commitment to mandar obedeciendo (lead by obeying), reflecting the attention to
process that characterizes new social movements. Yet it left unclear the role of
the EZLN leaders (or of the civic Frente Zapatista de Liberación Nacional
[Zapatista National Liberation Front—FZLN]) in connecting to a national
movement, particularly during periods of “strategic silence” when there was
no dialogue with the government.
It was this dilemma of potential isolation within their autonomous regions—
containment within a space that could be ignored, the “indio permitido” (Hale,
2004)—that the Zapatistas sought to address with their June 2005 Sixth
Declaration from the Lacandón Jungle. They broke a four-year silence to hold a
series of conferences/forums with civil society, inaugurating the “Other
Campaign,” in which Zapatista leaders would visit other movements throughout the country from January to July 2006 to refocus the national agenda away
from election-year politicking (Harvey, 2005). In November 2005 the Zapatistas
dissolved the FZLN and curtailed the role of Enlace Civil (an organization that
had served as a clearinghouse for NGOs working in autonomous territories),
reflecting the new emphasis on direct decision making by Zapatista communitybased civil authorities.
Zapatista communities struggled to develop self-sufficient production and
exchange without dependence on resources (capital, land) controlled by others, to avoid being uprooted and dispersed by market forces that threatened
to “free” the community members as individuals at the expense of their collective right to preserve a different system. The Zapatistas understood this
resistance as “sustainable development,” but within the larger context of the
crisis of Mexican peasant agriculture it was not clear that the survival strategies of the autonomous communities—including sporadic “fair trade” and
other solidarity support, some collective production (mostly limited to newly
settled land “recovered” from ranchers), and wage labor when necessary to
make up for low market prices for corn/beans/coffee—amounted to an alternative to capitalism. The state and transnational corporations (as well as

Stahler-Sholk / RESISTING NEOLIBERAL HOMOGENIZATION

59

corporate-funded NGOs such as Conservation International) also used the
term “sustainability” to argue that small-scale peasant agriculture is an inefficient throwback, unsustainable in the era of corporate-dominated globalization. The same government that expels indigenous settlers from the Montes
Azules region in the name of protecting the environment also plans ecologically destructive mega-investment schemes such as agroindustrial African
palm and eucalyptus plantations under the framework of Plan PueblaPanamá. That corporate model appears “sustainable” only if it is subsidized
by infrastructural investments and, for that matter, by military (and paramilitary) coercion that structures the market by clearing resistant communities
from the area to be “developed.” The Mexican army blamed jungle colonists
for the devastating fires that swept the Lacandón region in 1998, when in fact
this had never occurred in 30 years of settlement prior to military incursions
and road building in the region (Nash, 2003: 86–87). Like members of the
movement led by Chico Mendes in the Brazilian Amazon, Zapatista communities in the Lacandón Jungle realize that poor peasant land colonists can be
scapegoated for their subsistence efforts unless they explicitly practice agroecology. Yet the autonomy that comes from sustainable agriculture is precisely
the reason these communities are targeted for dismantling to make way for
capitalist “development.”
In the Montes Azules region, in the crosshairs of global capital and Plan
Puebla-Panamá, corporate-backed bioprospecting and dam projects clashed
with peasant cultivation. In one community I visited in June/July 2003, a
group of Ch’ol families newly displaced by paramilitary violence in the northern part of the state was planting crops and building houses with only hand
tools and the wood, palm fronds, and vines found in the jungle. The group’s
arrival was met with threatening visits by armed “Lacandones” (actually
Maya Caribes), a tiny indigenous group that had been co-opted by the government since 1972, when a newly imagined “Lacandón Community” was
granted rights to over 600,000 hectares of forest in exchange for lumbering
concessions to corporate interests (De Vos, 2002). That suspect concession
ignored settlements by other indigenous groups, many of which had legal
rights to their lands through the agrarian reform. The government further
muddled the issue in 1978 by establishing the Montes Azules Biosphere
Reserve, overlapping much of the territory of the previously defined
Lacandón Community. In 2000, with bioprospecting operations under way in
the area, the corporate-funded NGOs Conservation International and World
Wildlife Fund launched a “conservationist” campaign, demanding eviction of
settlers from Montes Azules on environmental grounds. The government then
began evicting Zapatista communities, using combinations of Lacandones
(pitted against other ethnicities), agents of the Federal Prosecutor for
Environmental Protection, and federal military units.
These evictions, rationalized by a discourse of governmental protection of
indigenous (Lacandón) rights and (corporate-defined) environmentalism, served
the combined purposes of anti-Zapatista counterinsurgency and clearing the way
for global capital.6 In the particular community I visited, the newly arrived Ch’ol
settlers had quickly petitioned for incorporation into the Zapatista autonomous
municipality of Libertad de los Pueblos Maya. Their survival strategy also

60

LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES

included designating a community member as “agricultural technician” to
receive training in agroecology from an NGO in the distant city of San
Cristóbal, inviting another NGO to send trainers to the community for followup workshops on techniques of sustainable agriculture, negotiating with a
young community member who was finishing his secondary schooling in the
northern zone to return to the new settlement to establish an autonomous primary school, inviting the San Cristóbal–based Fray Bartolomé de Las Casas
Human Rights Center to maintain a rotating observer presence in the community following threatening visits from paramilitary and military forces, and
preparing to send a representative to town for training to link up with the
Network of Community Human Rights Defenders. For all the settlers’
resourcefulness and apparent unity of purpose, however, the government
managed to divide them, inducing one faction to sign a document apologizing to the “Lacandón Community” for occupying “its” land and promising to
leave “voluntarily.” Then in January 2004 the military and other government
agencies invaded, arresting the leadership and evicting the community. This
case again illustrates the complexity of the autonomy struggle. The state, serving the interests of global capital, has appropriated the language of agrarian
reform, indigenous rights, and environmentalism. The community, having
been violently evicted from one territory, had a shaky claim to “sustainable
development” (clearing rain forest to plant corn) based on the counterfactual
of how transnationals planned to use the land. Also, their tenuous historical
and geographic link to the autonomous municipality made it hard to ensure
“good government,” the basis for the Zapatistas’ legitimacy claim for the right
to local self-rule.
Other important elements of the Zapatista construction of grassroots autonomy have included community-controlled education and administration of
justice. In the early aftermath of the 1994 uprising, some of the governmentsupplied bilingual teachers who had worked in indigenous communities in
Chiapas abandoned their posts, and others were expelled by Zapatista communities. Many of these teachers had been sent out through branches of the
Department of Education as part of the assimilationist policies administered
since the 1950s by the Instituto Nacional Indigenista (National Indigenist
Institute—INI). The Zapatista communities, in rejecting the bilingual government teachers, chose to sacrifice the meager educational resources on offer in
order to open up new possibilities of community control and relevant curriculum emphasizing such things as agriculture and indigenous culture. Yet
this meant new challenges such as negotiating for NGO assistance without
losing autonomy and designing new curricula without deepening the divisions between Zapatista-affiliated and other indigenous people. In judicial
administration, autonomous authorities face challenges of ambiguous lines of
demarcation in areas of divided communities and dual power. Their enforcement powers in effect depend on each community’s or region’s acceptance of
their legitimacy. Notwithstanding the rights of indigenous communities
under the San Andrés Accords to implement local normative systems, the
government selectively invoked human rights—privileging the individual
(property) rights demanded by the neoliberal model—to undermine
autonomous authorities (Speed and Collier, 2000).

Stahler-Sholk / RESISTING NEOLIBERAL HOMOGENIZATION

61

PRELIMINARY LESSONS OF THE
ZAPATISTA AUTONOMY EXPERIENCE
The Zapatista movement is continually evolving, reflecting the dynamic
interaction between neoliberalism and the social movements that contest it. As
the state brokers the reconfiguration of markets in accordance with the logic of
global capital, new organizational bases and forms of organizing are emerging
within civil society, attempting to build alternatives from the grassroots. This
necessarily involves these movements in political struggles as they claim rights
to organize autonomously from control by the state or market actors. The
Zapatista example suggests that “autonomy” is not a monolithic concept or a
magic bullet against neoliberalism. States implementing neoliberal projects
have a variety of ways of responding to autonomy movements, trying to neutralize or divert them. Several potential dead ends for autonomy movements are
identified here. One is a version of autonomy defined merely as territorial
decentralization, which could convert the regional authorities into appendages
of the existing power structure. A second is autonomy that cuts off local
claimants from resources, “freeing” them to fend for themselves as the central
state paves the way for the penetration of the global market. A third is the
neoliberal multiculturalism trap, recognizing multiple (ethnic) identities while
denying any substantive collective rights to the diverse groups.
In navigating between these shoals, the Zapatistas have created a space for
local communities to experiment with the construction of new models of government. This pluralism and flexibility of autonomies helped the movement
survive over 10 years of intense state-organized counteroffensive, but the
Zapatistas’ future depends on their ability (limited so far) to articulate this local
resistance into a national movement. Community-controlled social and political
institutions—schools, clinics, systems of justice, and regional planning—are part
of the struggle to define collective priorities independently of the logic of the
market. As global market forces reduce space for self-sufficient development, the
importance of the microcosm of Zapatista autonomous communities—like the
spaces occupied and transformed by Argentine piqueteros and Brazilian landless—is in symbolizing alternative and inspiring new political movements that
challenge the state’s posture as broker for global capital.

NOTES
1. Big Noise Tactical Media, 2000. http://www.bignoisefilms.com.
2. See Secretaría de Gobernación/Consejo Nacional de Población (CONAPO), “Remesas”
(http://www.conapo.gob.mx/publicaciones/nuevaera/04.pdf). Chiapas ranked #1 in CONAPO’s
index of marginalization, while US$500 million in remittances in 2004 exceeded the value of the
entire state’s corn harvest (Daniel Villafuerte, cited in Pickard, 2005).
3. See chapters by María Eugenia Reyes Ramos, Gemma van der Haar, and Araceli Burguete
in Pérez Ruiz (2004).
4. The Third Declaration from the Lacandón Jungle asserted, “Custody of the homeland is
withdrawn from the federal government,” basing the right of self-government on Article 39 of
Mexico’s 1917 Constitution (http://www.ezln.org/documentos/1995/199501xx.en.htm).
5. Examples here are from my various visits to communities as a human rights observer since
1994.

62

LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES

6. José Campillo, head of the environmental protection agency, noted in 2001 that “until these
highly ungovernable zones are recovered, private investment will not come, and that has negative
consequences throughout the country” (interview cited in Chiapas al Día, February 3, 2004). See also
CIEPAC Bulletins 347 (June 10, 2003) and 378 (October 15, 2003) (http://www.ciepac.org/bulletins).

REFERENCES
Burguete Cal y Mayor, Araceli
2003 “The de facto autonomous process: new jurisdictions and parallel governments in rebellion,” pp. 191–218 in Jan Rus, Rosalva Aída Hernández Castillo, and Shannan L. Mattiace
(eds.), Mayan Lives, Mayan Utopias: The Indigenous Peoples of Chiapas and the Zapatista Rebellion.
Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Collier, George A.
1994 “The new politics of exclusion: antecedents to the rebellion in Mexico.” Dialectical
Anthropology 19(1) :1–44.
Colloredo-Mansfeld, Rudi
2002 “Autonomy and interdependence in native movements: towards a pragmatic politics in
the Ecuadorian Andes.” Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power 9(2): 173–195.
De Vos, Jan
2002 Una tierra para sembrar sueños: Historia reciente de la Selva Lacandona, 1950–2000. Mexico
City: CIESAS/Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Díaz-Polanco, Héctor and Consuelo Sánchez
2002 México diverso: El debate por la autonomía. Mexico City: Siglo XXI.
Earle, Duncan and Jeanne Simonelli
2005 Uprising of Hope: Sharing the Zapatista Journey to Alternative Development. Lanham, MD:
AltaMira Press.
Eber, Christine
2003 “Buscando una nueva vida: liberation through autonomy in San Pedro Chenalhó,
1970–1998,” pp. 135–159 in Jan Rus, Rosalva Aída Hernández Castillo, and Shannan L.
Mattiace (eds.), Mayan Lives, Mayan Utopias. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Eckstein, Susan Eva and Timothy P. Wickham-Crowley (eds.)
2003 Struggles for Social Rights in Latin America. New York: Routledge.
Esteva, Gustavo
2003 “The meaning and scope of the struggle for autonomy,” pp. 243–269 in Jan Rus, Rosalva
Aída Hernández Castillo, and Shannan L. Mattiace (eds.), Mayan Lives, Mayan Utopias.
Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Foran, John (ed.)
2003 The Future of Revolutions: Rethinking Political and Social Change in the Age of Globalization.
London: Zed Books.
Fox, Jonathan
1997 “The difficult transition from clientelism to citizenship: lessons from Mexico,” in
Douglas A. Chalmers et al. (eds.), The New Politics of Inequality in Latin America: Rethinking
Participation and Representation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gills, Barry (ed.)
2000 Globalization and the Politics of Resistance. London: Macmillan.
Hale, Charles R.
2002 “Does multiculturalism menace? Governance, cultural rights, and the politics of identity
in Guatemala.” Journal of Latin American Studies 34(3): 485–524.
2004 “Rethinking indigenous politics in the era of the ‘indio permitido.’” NACLA Report on the
Americas 38(2): 16–21.
Harvey, Neil
1998 The Chiapas Rebellion: The Struggle for Land and Democracy. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
2005 “Inclusion through autonomy: Zapatistas and dissent.” NACLA Report on the Americas
39(2): 12–17.

Stahler-Sholk / RESISTING NEOLIBERAL HOMOGENIZATION

63

Hellman, Judith Adler
1992 “The study of new social movements in Latin America and the question of autonomy,”
pp. 52–61 in Arturo Escobar and Sonia E. Alvarez (eds.), The Making of Social Movements in
Latin America: Identity, Strategy, and Democracy. Boulder: Westview Press.
1994 “Mexican popular movements, clientelism, and the process of democratization.” Latin
American Perspectives 81(2): 124–142.
Hernández, Rosalva Aída, Sarela Paz, and María Teresa Sierra (eds.)
2004 El estado y los indígenas en tiempos del PAN: Neoindigenismo, legalidad e identidad. Mexico
City: CIESAS.
Leyva Solano, Xóchitl
2003 “Regional, communal, and organizational transformations in Las Cañadas,” pp. 161–184
in Jan Rus, Rosalva Aída Hernández Castillo, and Shannan L. Mattiace (eds.), Mayan Lives,
Mayan Utopias. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Marcos, Subcomandante Insurgente
2003 “Chiapas: La treceava estela.” July. http://www.ezln.org/documentos/1995/199501xx
.en.htm.
Mattiace, Shannan
2003 To See with Two Eyes: Peasant Activism and Indian Autonomy in Chiapas, Mexico.
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Nash, June C.
2001 Mayan Visions: The Quest for Autonomy in an Age of Globalization. New York: Routledge.
2003 “Indigenous development alternatives.” Urban Anthropology and Studies of Cultural
Systems and World Economic Development 32(1): 57–98.
Otero, Gerardo (ed.)
2004 Mexico in Transition: Neoliberal Globalism, the State, and Civil Society. London: Zed Books.
Pérez Ruiz, Maya Lorena (ed.)
2004 Tejiendo historias: Tierra, género y poder en Chiapas. Mexico City: INAH.
Pickard, Miguel
2005 “In the crossfire: Mesoamerican migrants journey north.” Silver City, NM, Americas
Program, March 18. http://americas.irc-online.org/reports/2005/0503migrants.html.
Rus, Jan
1995 “Local adaptation to global change: the reordering of native society in highland Chiapas,
Mexico 1974–1994.” European Review of Latin American and Caribbean Studies 58 (June): 71–89.
Speed, Shannon and Jane F. Collier
2000 “Limiting indigenous autonomy in Chiapas, Mexico: the state government’s use of
human rights.” Human Rights Quarterly 22: 877–905.
Stahler-Sholk, Richard
1998 “Massacre in Chiapas.” Latin American Perspectives 25(4): 63–75.
2001 “Globalization and social movement resistance: the Zapatista rebellion in Chiapas,
Mexico.” New Political Science 23(4): 493–516.
2005 “Time of the snails: autonomy and resistance in Chiapas.” NACLA Report on the Americas
28(5): 34–40.
Stephen, Lynn
1997 “Pro-Zapatista and Pro-PRI: Resolving the contradictions of Zapatismo in rural
Oaxaca.” Latin American Research Review 32(2): 41–70.
Williams, Heather L.
2001 Social Movements and Economic Transition: Markets and Distributive Conflict in Mexico. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Yashar, Deborah J.
2005 Contesting Citizenship in Latin America: The Rise of Indigenous Movements and the Postliberal
Challenge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

