Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470
DOI 10.1007/s11211-013-0197-8

Revolution for Breakfast: Intersections of Activism,
Service, and Violence in the Black Panther Party’s
Community Service Programs
Ricky J. Pope • Shawn T. Flanigan

Published online: 12 November 2013
 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

Abstract While there is a small body of research on service provision by groups
that espouse a willingness to use violence, this research often is based on a presumption that service provision is used solely as a utilitarian tool to recruit members
for political or violent activities. Through an examination of service provision by
the Black Panther Party (BPP), the authors seek to problematize the utilitarian
notion of service provision by reframing political activism, service, and violence as
parallel acts of resistance serving similar purposes of countering oppression and
healing communities. During field research in Oakland, California, extensive
information was collected through interviews with former BPP members and
recipients of BPP social services, as well as archival documents and audiovisual
materials produced both about and by the BPP. The analysis explores several
examples of the BPP offering free healthcare, breakfast, and education services. The
data provide evidence that an organization that has been traditionally framed as
militant not only acted rationally, but also provided an important defense for their
community. Both their social service provision and their commitment to bear arms
were viewed locally as acts of compassion, protection, and love.
Keywords
activism

Black Panther Party  Social services  Violence  Community

R. J. Pope
Counselor Education and Counseling Psychology, Western Michigan University,
3521 Sangren Hall, Kalamazoo, MI 49008-5226, USA
e-mail: ricky.j.pope@wmich.edu
S. T. Flanigan (&)
School of Public Affairs, San Diego State University, 5500 Campanile Dr. PSFA 162,
San Diego, CA 92182, USA
e-mail: shawn.flanigan@sdsu.edu

123

446

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

Introduction
While there is a small body of research on service provision by violent groups (and/
or groups that espouse a willingness to use violence), this research often is based on
a presumption that service provision is used solely as a utilitarian tool to assist with
recruiting additional members for political or violent activities (see for example
Levitt, 2004; Ranstorp, 1998). We argue that in many cases this dynamic is much
more complex. While some organizations may use service provision as a tool for
recruitment, prior evidence shows that service provision can also be an expression
of religious calling, cultural or ethnic solidarity, or activist resistance against
oppression and disenfranchisement (Fairfax, 1995; Fawaz, 2000; Flanigan, 2006,
2008; Flanigan & Abdel-Samad, 2009; Franklin, 1992; Harik, 1996, 2004; Hilliard,
2008; Hilliard & Cole, 1993; Smith, Shue, Vest, & Villarreal, 1999).
Through an examination of the case of the Black Panther Party (BPP),1 this
article seeks to problematize the utilitarian notion of service provision by reframing
political activism, service, and violence as parallel acts of resistance serving similar
purposes of countering oppression and healing communities. Despite varied
opinions about the BPP, little is known from the perspective of the rank and file
members who carried out everyday tasks, or from people living in the community
who may have received services. We address this gap with qualitative, contextual
data. During field research in Oakland, California, extensive information was
collected from archival documents and audiovisual materials produced both about
and by the BPP. In addition, employing a contextualized humanistic perspective
(Johnson, 2006) in interviews with former BPP members and recipients of BPP
social services allowed us to understand local perceptions of an organization that
has been traditionally framed as militant. An analysis of these data provides us with
a critical lens to explore the intersections of class, poverty, and inequality in the
Oakland community.
The content analysis explored several examples of the BPP offering free
healthcare, breakfast, and education services. We find that the militant imagery
generated by the BPP allowed people to recapture a sense of personal and
community agency, while the BPP’s service provision provided concrete resources
that were otherwise unavailable. The data provide evidence that an organization that
has been traditionally framed as militant not only acted rationally, but also provided
an important defense for their community. Both their social service provision and
their commitment to bear arms were viewed locally as acts of compassion,
protection, and love.

1

In this article we make an effort to refer to the Black Panther Party in the ways in which our data
indicate its members referred to it. Therefore, we use ‘‘the Party,’’ ‘‘Panthers,’’ and the abbreviation
‘‘BPP’’ interchangeably to refer to the Black Panther Party.

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

447

Service Provision by Armed Groups: Utilitarian Tool Versus Fulfillment
of Mission?
Relationships between charitable service provision and violent activities within the
same organization can be conceived in at least two ways. Some consider the
relationship between these two different types of activities to be utilitarian (Levitt,
2004; Ranstorp, 1998). Within this vein, organizations involved in violence and
political uprising provide social services as a tool to increase support for their
activities from members of the community at large. However, an alternative
argument is that, because charitable organizations and violent resistance organizations each are created in response to political and social exclusion, charity and
violence are simply two activities along a spectrum of possible actions that are used
to address identical political and social concerns (Flanigan, 2006). We explain both
of these perspectives, and later in the article indicate to what extent our data support
each depiction.
Service Provision as Utilitarian Tool
One way of conceptualizing the service activities and violent activities of a single
organization is that violent organizations use social service provision as a tool to
gain the acceptance of their community. The degree to which communities accept
the violent activities of insurgent or revolutionary organizations is variable, even
when groups claim to be fighting to address community members’ social and
political concerns. Service provision can be a useful tool for generating genuine
acceptance and active participation in an organization’s violent and/or political
activities; short of that, dependence on services may at least silence community
dissent (see Fig. 1). This is because of the power dynamics at play in social service
settings, particularly when individuals served are poor and marginalized (Handler,
1973, 1979). Relationships between social service providers and recipients are
governed by the amount of power each can bring to the exchange; the amount of
power a social service provider has over the recipient is a direct function of the
recipient’s ability to obtain aid elsewhere (Hasenfeld, 1987). Thus, in communities
neglected by the state, reliance on a single service provider makes charitable service
provision a powerful tool. Sole service provision makes community members very
dependent on the organizations that provide for their most basic needs. Since
forgoing access to services is not a realistic option, economic and social conditions
oblige individuals to consume services from whoever provides them, and
individuals may become beholden to the providers’ political demands (Flanigan,
2006).
Service Provision, Politics, and Violence: Different Means to the Same End?
There is a wide literature in political science regarding the ways in which violence
often organizes around shared group identity, such as ethnicity or religion see for
example Cronin, 2002; Fearon & Laitin, 2003; Hoffman, 1998; Juergensmeyer,
2003; Stern, 1999; Tilly, 2003; Treverton, Gregg, Gibran, & Yost, 2005. However,

123

448

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

Continuum of Community Acceptance of Violent Activities by
Terrorists and Political Insurgents

Lack of
acceptance
and active
resistance

Passive
acceptance due
to silencing/
coercion

Genuine
acceptance/
widespread
favorable opinion

Active
participation
by community
members

Fig. 1 Continuum of community acceptance of violent activities by terrorists and political insurgents

group identity in and of itself does not motivate violence; exclusion and grievance
often serve as a catalyst for violent activities. Much political violence originates
from the fact that groups are excluded from political and social participation in
mainstream society (Gurr, 2000). What may be less recognized is that charitable
activity by minority groups often is motivated by similar exclusion. Asian
immigrants began to form associations similar to those in their native countries as
they found themselves denied access to the social and political life of the United
States, and their willingness to participate in community-serving activities remains
positively correlated to the level of racial tension in the community (Chan, 1991).
Shao (1995) attributes the growth of a complex and self-supporting network of
Chinese–American charity organizations to the aggressive and retaliatory response
Chinese initially encountered in the United States. Latinos in the United States
create mutual assistance associations ‘‘to enable community survival in politically,
socially, or economically hostile environments’’ (Cortés, 1995). American Jewish
philanthropy primarily has been targeted toward rescuing threatened and oppressed
Jewish communities around the world, and a reduction of exclusionary practices
toward the Jewish community in the United States is cited as one factor that has
decreased Jewish philanthropy, with American Jews becoming more likely to
donate time and money to secular causes (Kosmin, 1995).
Community service and political resistance also are not so easily separated; one
may be the basis for the other, or charitable activities and political resistance may be
considered one and the same (Flanigan, 2006; Flanigan & Abdel-Samad, 2009).
Social welfare and political struggle have traditionally been linked in the AfricanAmerican community, and many Black nonprofit organizations pursue these
projects simultaneously (Smith et al., 1999). As Fairfax (1995) notes, AfricanAmerican philanthropy has been used overtly as an instrument for social protest.
Vigilance committees were created to assist fugitive slaves, and mutual aid societies
have played an important role in stimulating protest movements (Fairfax, 1995;
Franklin, 1992). Community organizations serving migrant farm workers in the
southwest were incubators for the Mexican–American civil rights movement,
producing political activists like Cesar Chavez (Joseph, 1995).

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

449

Seen from this perspective, the ideological leap between charity and political
violence may not be as far as one would think. These examples demonstrate how
charitable activity can transition into contentious politics, and it is well established
that political activity at times becomes violent. Early urban Native-American
service providers were political in nature; once their ambitions for pan-Indian armed
resistance proved fruitless, organizations began to focus on policy advocacy and
social protest (Joseph, 1995). Similar religious beliefs and social concerns inspire
the varied activities of Christian faith-based family planning programs, right-to-life
political action committees, and abortion clinic bombers such as Eric Rudolph.
Similar social and political grievance motivated African-American mutual assistance committees, the non-violent protest movement inspired by Martin Luther
King, Jr., and the armed resistance of the BPP. Viewed in this light, it is not difficult
to imagine charitable service provision simply as another means of addressing the
same problems that violent activities intend to address.

The Black Power Movement
Often the 60s are remembered as an era of non-violent protest in the struggle for
civil rights; however, in many pockets of the U.S. the appeal of non-violent
discourse began to wane in the face of police brutality and differential enforcement
of the law. For many, the philosophy of non-violence was an untenable position and
the call for Black empowerment was the next step (Austin, 2006; Joseph, 2010). As
Austin (2006) explains, ‘‘Police brutality, lack of opportunity, and the realization
that opportunity was not forthcoming in the near future led many Blacks to conclude
that armed self-defense coupled with self-help was the only way to end the despair’’
(p. 69). Situating the Black power movement in a larger historical view orients one
to see Black power politics as a logical step in Black American calls for selfdetermination. When contrasted with the civil rights movement the Black power
movement is often reduced to an immoral aberration, featuring hoodlums burning
down cities and threatening the safety of good law-abiding citizens with guns.
Recent scholarship, however. recognizes that civil rights and Black power
movements emanate from a centuries-long Black freedom struggle. Although these
two movements represent divergent paths, they often parallel and intertwine in the
larger struggle for Black liberation (Joseph, 2010).
The Black power movement can be defined as a collective movement for selfdetermination and reclamation of humanity. The promotion of Black power as a
political strategy was first articulated by Stokely Charmichael in June of 1966
(Jones & Jeffries, 1998; Joseph, 2010). Charmichael spent a year organizing local
residents to secure Black political and economic power. For instance, The Lowndes
County Black Panther Party organized several political candidates to run in a local
election (Joseph, 2010). Lowndes County BPP first used the emblem of the Black
Panther that was later adopted by the founders of the Oakland, CA Black Panther
Party for Self-Defense.

123

450

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

The Local Context: Oakland, California
Prior to the founding of the BPP the city of Oakland witnessed several transitions as
Black families migrated from the southern states to relocate in northern and western
cites to gain economic opportunity and to escape racial prejudice. Self (2003)
explained that post-1945 Oakland was a site of urban transformation that saw the
weakening of unions and working class consciousness. During the 1950s and 1960s,
the city of Oakland was faced with the problem of racial transition, leading city
officials to create new administrative programs and layers of bureaucracy in order to
manage social problems and reassert public authority (Rhomberg, 2004). The
modernization of the Southern economy and subsequent migration of Black
Americans changed the landscape of cites (Murch, 2010). This lead to what Piven
and Cloward (1977) refer to as a transvaluation, where institutional upheavals usher
people to reappraise their situation and thus simulate mass arousal. As Black
Americans living in the Bay area vied for social mobility, integration became
inevitable. However, the city’s initial response to racial and social change came not
through a process of electoral incorporation or political bargaining, but from public
administrative authorities responsible for social control. The police acting as
authorized agents of the state carried out discriminatory policies (Alkebulan, 2007;
Austin, 2006; Murch, 2010; Self, 2003). The fact that these processes victimized
Black communities more than White communities led Self (2003) to challenge
existent discourse to move beyond the trope of the Black ghetto paradigm of crisis.
Instead, Self suggested that future research theorize how African-American
communities responded in creative, productive, and at times even halting and
unsuccessful ways to the structural changes brought on by migration and
metropolitan re-organization.

The Black Panther Party for Self-Defense
The Black Panther Party for Self-Defense was founded in Oakland, CA in the year
of 1966 by Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale. During this period Oakland,
California had one of the highest unemployment rates in the country, and the lack of
employment opportunities and the number of families on welfare was the second
highest in California (Newton & Morrison, 2009). The ideology that would come to
shape the organization grew out of rising class and racial consciousness, as well as
the belief that non-violence was an inadequate political strategy to address the needs
of the Black community (Newton & Blake, 1973/2009). The founders were also
concerned with police harassment in the Black community and were driven to take
up arms as advocated by the Lowndes County Freedom Organization, the body of
work left by Malcolm X, and the stance of Robert Williams (Bloom & Martin,
2013). Robert Williams, a former NAACP chapter president, was committed to both
desegregation and civil rights but argued that non-violence was not the only route to
Black liberation. Rhodes (2007) explains this assertion was an act of resistance that
served to empower Black Americans, further supporting the claim that Black Power
politics was a shift in a larger movement rather than a ‘‘spontaneous’’ creation. The

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

451

assassination of Malcolm X and urban riots happening throughout the nation’s cities
were significant contributors to a prevailing angst. When coupled with limited
economic opportunities, local government suppression of Black political participation, and police harassment, the need for the BPP manifested itself (Austin, 2006).
In Bloom and Martin’s (2013) political analysis of the BPP, they assert that the
power of the BPP grew out of their politics of armed self-defense; their capacity to
sustain a challenge to state agents; and their ability to draw broad legal, political,
and financial support from allies, making them difficult to repress. Armed
confrontation with police was an early stage in the BPP’s growth. The BPP also
engaged in non-military organizing activities such as promoting community control
of the police, lobbying for installation of traffic lights, teaching Black history
classes, promoting tenant and welfare rights, and investigating incidents of police
brutality. As the BPP continued to respond to the evolving political landscape, they
forged a cross-racial alliance with the Peace and Freedom Party and Huey Newton
authored a paper in support of a strategic alliance with the LGBT community (Jones
& Jeffries, 1998). Next, BPP members provided a variety of survival programs
designed to meet the needs of the community. According to Jones and Jeffries
(1998), survival projects served as an organizing tool with which to expose
inequities and contradictions with the United States. In 1969 the Party instituted
‘‘serve the people programs.’’ These services became a focus of their national
agenda (Jones & Jeffries, 1998; Bloom & Martin, 2013), helping the Party to resist
repression and garner allies while advocating armed self-defense. However,
according to Bloom and Martin (2013), the politics of armed self-defense became
impossible to sustain when the U.S. political landscape again changed during the
Nixon administration with unveiling of affirmative action programs, normalized
relations with revolutionary governments abroad, roll back of the draft, and
increased Black electoral representation.
Given the rich and complex history of the BPP, space does not permit an in-depth
account of the Panthers’ political work here (for a comprehensive review see Bloom
& Martin, 2013). The remainder of this article will focus on the conflux of violence
and social service provision in the activities of the BPP.

The BPP as a Social Movement Organization
McCarthy and Zald (1977) present an inclusive view of Social Movement
Organizations (SMOs), which can be defined as any civil society organization that
aligns its goals with the preferences of a social movement or countermovement and
attempts to implement those goals. Early explanations of social movements relied
on a collective behavior approach that sought to explain social movements as
irrational and used solely by members of marginalized groups. Resource mobilization theory challenged this view by suggesting that collective action is a rational
response occurring when adequate resources are available (McCarthy & Zald,
1977). Scholarship from this perspective focuses on organizational bases of
mobilization, resources related to SMO strategy, and the SMO structure (Cangilia &
Carmin, 2005).

123

452

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

SMOs or what Gamson (1975) calls challenging groups are special kinds of actors
with a unique set of problems. They are located outside of the polity and lack resources
otherwise available to political actors located in the polity. Thus, challenging groups
are unable to draw upon existing relationships or vested interests available to other
political actors. Instead, they must activate loyalty on the basis of mass support or
bring allies to their cause, enabling them to enter the bargaining arena in ways
favorable to protest (Gamson, 1975). We argue that both the BPP’s use of violence and
their provision of health and social services provided an organizational basis for
mobilization and activated loyalty, which allowed them to mount a challenge to U.S.
government policy. Violent rhetoric influenced the BPP’s growth by serving as a
magnet for disaffected youth in America’s ghettos (Austin, 2006). According to
Austin (2006), ‘‘The political violence the Panthers symbolized made them extremely
popular among those who had experienced—personally or to relatives, friends,
neighbors—police brutality’’ (p. 154.) At the same time, many of the people who
volunteered in the BPP survival programs did not support carrying weapons but were
adamant supporters of the party due to the real empowerment brought by the programs
(Alkebulan, 2007; Murch, 2010). The Party attracted thousands with its advocacy of
community control of education, economics, and politics, and the survival programs
attracted a ‘‘different and more disciplined membership’’ (Alkebulan, 2007, p. 28).

Violence in the Party
As a SMO the BPP presented a multifaceted challenge to the U.S. government
outlined in the Ten-Point Party Platform (see Appendix 1). This platform presented
an ideology that would undergird the survival programs that would later be offered
nationwide in local communities. Point ten discusses the Panthers’ insistence that
society meet the community’s need for basis sustenance such as food, clothing, and
housing. Yet it was point seven that was first addressed by the BPP; according to
Jeffries (2006), the Panthers implored Blacks to exercise their Second Amendment
Rights to bear arms to protect themselves from violence.
‘‘Although the group almost immediately delved into teaching Black history, the
importance of African culture, political awareness, and economic self-sufficiency, it
knew none of this knowledge was useful without first securing Black bodies,’’
explains Austin (2006, p. 147). Point seven highlighted a request for an immediate
end to police brutality and murder of Black people, a proclamation that was in direct
protest against the police brutality taking place in the Black community and the U.S.
government’s failure to enforce civil rights legislation. As Austin notes, ‘‘The civil
rights movement had failed miserably in persuading the police that beating Blacks
was a bad idea’’ (p. 152). Baldwin (2006) explains that the BPP was able to
conceptualize the U.S. constitution as giving legality to their armed struggle in
manner similar to the colonial resistance to British occupation in the 1760s. She
proposes that a ‘‘reconsideration of the meaning and significance of the Ninth
Amendment suggests a striking paradox: the militant and revolutionary demands of
the BPP were legitimate, reasonable, and within the bounds of the U.S.
constitution’’ (Baldwin, 2006, p. 78.)

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

453

According to Austin (2006), ‘‘The primary thing to understand about violence in
regard to the BPP is that much of it was rhetorical flourish’’ (p. 112). Nonetheless,
the BPP’s paramilitary orientation included weapons training classes, close combat
drills, guerrilla warfare propaganda, and armed confrontations with police officers
throughout the nation (Jones & Jeffries, 1998). During the initial building of the
organization, Huey Newton spoke about both political education and classes on the
safe use of weapons for new members. Another example of paramilitary training is
the work of John Sloane, who lived in the local community and had prior military
training. He was able to teach members field stripping and shooting of the M-1 rifle
(Seale, 1970/1991).
The BPP’s use of violence was not irrational. Rather, it was intentional, though
dependent on the changing social context as discussed earlier. Newton referred to
the police as a military arm or occupying force in Black communities, and discussed
failed attempts to organize civilian review boards to supervise the behavior of the
police (Newton & Blake, 1973/2009, p. 127). Often Black Americans were unable
to gain access to safe policing strategies, and so the BPP’s initial defiance was
aimed at the police (Austin, 2006). People cannot defy institutions to which they
have no access and to which they make no contributions (Piven & Cloward, 1977),
and in this case the police, acting as state agents, compromised the state’s
legitimacy. Black communities’ inability to procure just community policing and
their larger exclusion from the polity created opportunities for defiance. According
to Gamson (1975), violence should be viewed as an instrumental act aimed at
furthering the purposes of a group, and used when they have some reason to think it
will help their cause. In Newton’s memoir, Revolutionary Suicide, he explains that:
We recognized that it was ridiculous to report the police to police, but we
hoped that by raising encounters to a higher level, by patrolling the police with
arms, we would see a change in their behavior. Further, the community would
notice this and become interested in the party. Thus our armed patrols were
also means of recruiting (Newton & Blake, 1973/2009, p. 127).
The BPP’s armed patrols were aimed at changing police behavior within the
confines of the law, and they were a means of recruitment. A typical Panther recruit
was a young adolescent still in search of adulthood who was likely a high school or
college student (Heath, 1976; Jones & Jeffries, 1998). Individuals who joined the Party
were usually between the ages of eighteen and twenty-three, and those with some
college training often became leaders. The BPP police patrols would translate into a
sense of militancy that would resonate with Black youth. O’Reilly (1989) explains that
most authors tend to describe the BPP’s proclamations as threats or ‘‘grandiose
claims,’’ but the Panthers self-consciously presented individuals and images whose
revolutionary representation would provoke the possibility of radical social change by
creating identification between the visual image and the viewer (Ongiri, 2010).
An additional way to understand violence and the BPP is presented by Singh
(1998), who argues that the Panthers exercised Bourdieu’s concept of symbolic
violence, supporting the claim in three ways. First, the Panthers were a threat not
only because they espoused willingness to engage in armed self-defense, but also
more importantly because they challenged the state’s monopoly on legitimate use of

123

454

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

violence. Next, by policing the police, the Panthers signaled the eruption of a nonstate identity into the everyday life of the state. Finally, by disrupting the official
performance of the state through pursuing the political strategy of building foreign
relationships with other revolutionary states (i.e., BPP journeys to China, Cuba, and
North Korea), Singh (1998) argues that the Panthers were in fact a real threat.
In challenging the police the Party disrupted state functioning by employing
disruption as a tactic of influence (Piven & Cloward, 1977). The impact of political
disruption depends on electoral conditions, and given the widespread social change
taking place during the period, the BPP’s threat was significant. Piven and Cloward
(1977) argue that protest movements are shaped by institutional conditions and not
by the purposive efforts of leaders and organizers, meaning that strategies must be
pursued that escalate the momentum and impact of disruptive protest. For the Black
community police brutality was an institutional condition worthy of redress, and the
disruptive protest of the armed patrols provided this effect.
To further explain the use of violence by SMOs, Gamson (1975) argues that it is
not the weakness of the user but the weakness of the target that accounts for violence.
He suggests that violence grows from an impatience born of confidence and rising
efficacy occurring when hostility toward the victim renders it a relatively safe and
costless strategy. Violence is best viewed as a special case of constraints which
Gamson defines as the addition of new disadvantages to the situation or the threat to
do so, regardless of the particular resources used. In the end unruly groups that use
violence, strikes, and other constraints have better-than-average success in gaining
acceptance for new advantages than groups who use no constraints but are subject to
receive either violence or arrest. For the purpose of our argument aggrieved groups
who challenge their social and political exclusion and are likely to face arrest or
violence from their agonist are rational actors utilizing available means when they
engage in constraints likely to confer acceptance or new advantages.

The Black Panther Party’s Social Services
According to Jeffries and Nissim-Sabat (2007) there are three major voids in
scholarly examinations of the BPP’s activities: (a) the mundane grunt work done by
local Panther activists has been lost in the literature; (b) there has been an overemphasis on the Panther’s clashes with law enforcement, which resulted in a missed
opportunity to showcase the substantial community programs offered by the
Panthers at the local level; and (c) the experiences of rank and file members as well
as less celebrated branches should be studied in a critical analysis which situates
them in the larger context of the BPP as an organization.
Social Services
The BPP offered a wide range of health and social services as part of its survival
programs, including free breakfast programs for school children and food aid for
families; schools, adult education, and childcare; medical care, medical research,
and ambulance services; cooperative housing; employment assistance; free shoes

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

455

and clothing; free plumbing, home maintenance, and pest control; and protective
escort for the elderly (Alkebulan, 2007; Hilliard, 2008; Nelson, 2011; Witt, 2007).
One of the earliest academic accounts of social services provided by the Panthers is
the work of Abron (1998), who explains how Party members understood that in
order to maximize one’s potential, personal safety, nourishment, and adequate
health care were paramount. In more recent work, Jeffries’ edited text Comrades
(2007) documents the community works of the Baltimore, Winston-Salem,
Cleveland, Indianapolis, Milwaukee, Philadelphia, and Los Angeles Black Panther
Parties. Jeffries (2010) examines Panther activity in Seattle, Detroit, Kansas City,
New Orleans, Houston, and Des Moines, detailing the construction of survival
programs designed to improve the lives of African-Americans across the nation.
Dyson, Brooks, and Jeffries (2007) and Dyson (2010) explains that the Panther’s
community survival programs provided a form of education that exposed America’s
contradictions and insatiable appetite for materialism at the expense of poor people.
As Newton writes in To Die for the People, ‘‘So the survival programs are not
answers or solutions, but they will help us organize the community around a true
analysis and understanding of their situation. When consciousness and understanding is raised to a high level then the community will seize the time and deliver
themselves from the boot of their oppressors’’ (as quoted by Hilliard, 2008, p. 4).

Methodology
This research utilizes a contextual-narrative design in an effort to add to the
comparatively small body of research on service provision by groups who espouse a
willingness to use violence. Our case study draws upon formal and informal
interviews, visits to multiple sites of importance in and around West Oakland,
California, and content analysis of video footage, narrative and personal accounts,
and news articles published by the BPP. Eight individuals were interviewed who
were former Party members and individuals who had received services from the
BPP. These interview participants were guaranteed confidentiality as part of human
subjects protocol. Videos analyzed included a documentary about Richard Aoki
showing Asian involvement with the Party, and unreleased black and white footage
showing students in the Panther Schools. In addition to reviewing scholarly
accounts of the BPP, we examined multiple narrative and personal accounts by
Party members, including books published by founder Huey Newton, and more than
100 articles published by the BPP in their self-published periodicals.
This analysis intentionally focuses on interviews, videos, news articles, and other
documents that are generated by members of the BPP themselves, rather than items
created by those without close links to the Party. This inevitably results in a biased
body of data since the information comes from the movement’s perspective. These
sources may present a strategic account of the movement, and the Panthers’ own news
media is likely to propagandize on behalf of the Party. However, these sources are
appropriate for our analysis for two reasons. First, mainstream media coverage of the
BPP was overly focused on the Party’s violent imagery (Rhodes, 2007), neglecting the
health and social service work of the BPP (Nelson, 2011). As Nelson (2011) notes of

123

456

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

the Party’s self-published periodical the Black Panther, ‘‘the paper- even in its most
propagandistic moments- provided the most complete record of the Party’s healthrelated activities’’ (p. xiii). Second, information that comes from the movement’s
perspective is appropriate for our analysis because it is exactly this strategy and
propaganda we seek to examine critically. The literature on service provision by
militant groups argues that service provision occurs primarily for strategic purposes
with the intention of indoctrinating service recipients and recruiting them to engage in
more militant activities. Analyzing these data sources created by those who were
members of or closely tied to the party allows us to better engage with the question of
strategic motivations. For an in-depth discussion of other media’s coverage of the
BPP, readers should see Christian Davenport’s (2010) book Media Bias, Perspective,
and State Repression, and Jane Rhodes’ (2007) book Framing the Black Panthers.
Jeffries (2006, 2007, 2010) suggests that there has been too much focus on the
Oakland organization and not enough exploration of the community programs
carried out by local BPP chapters nationwide. While we were able to draw some
information from southern California, we acknowledge that our examination is also
heavily Oakland based. We strongly agree that a focus on the Black Panther
organization outside of Oakland, such as the work of Witt (2007) and Jeffries (2006,
2007, 2010) is needed and valuable. However, we also believe that the Oakland BPP
is not fully understood, and for our purposes, the Oakland organization offered an
abundance of rich data not necessarily available at other sites.
Community Services as Recruitment in the BPP
As we mentioned earlier, one construction of social service provision by
organizations that engage in violence is that these organizations provide services
as a tool to increase support for their activities from members of the community at
large, and to recruit individuals to fight for their cause. The idea that services may
serve as a tool for recruitment was neither alien to the Panthers nor to local
government officials according to this account in the Panther’s self-published
periodical The Black Panther,
Once the program was under way, however, we did receive a visit from an
official from the Los Angeles County Human Relations Board. He suggested
that he was merely checking the breakfast program out in terms of legitimacy;
that is, whether we were feedings kids because they were hungry, or because
we wanted to ‘‘indoctrinate’’ them with Panther ideology (Southern California
Chapter, Black Panther Party. June 14, 1969. P.3)
Ironically, in the same article the authors discuss the value that the breakfast
program has for educating students about the Party’s ideology, and the students’
potential for fueling the movement in later years.
The children we feed are beautiful and really relate to the breakfast and to the
Party. They want to know all about Huey, Eldridge, Bunchy, and John and the
party and its programs. They wear our buttons and ask about the paper daily.
They energy and enthusiasm they show after breakfast when we occasionally

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

457

drive them to school makes us appreciate ‘‘that if it weren’t for Huey, there
wouldn’t be Free Breakfast for Children.’’ THE YOUTH WE ARE FEEDING
WILL SURELY FEED THE REVOLUTION. ALL POWER TO THE PEOPLE
(Southern California Chapter, Black Panther Party. June 14, 1969. P.3)
In their writings, BPP leaders are clear about the role they believe their survival
programs will have in generating an almost Freirean consciousness-raising among
service recipients regarding oppression, injustice, and the need for revolution. This
dynamic is well-documented in Nelson’s (2011) book Body and Soul: The Black
Panther Party and the Fight against Medical Discrimination, in which Nelson
explains that an individual who visited a BPP-operated health clinic might also be
encouraged to attend a political education class discussing the writings of thinkers
like Franz Fanon. The link between the survival programs and political awareness is
apparent in the organization’s imagery and publications. At the bottom of Fig. 2, for
example, we see a young boy checking into receive free breakfast before school.
Above, we see the same boy pointing to an image of Black Panther members holding
guns, making it clear that revolutionary imagery and ideology is available to students
receiving food from the free breakfast program. Both of these images appeared next
to an editorial about the BPP’s free breakfast program, and the publication of the
images next to one other seems to indicate that the Party wants to advertise the
political education of youth who participate in its social programs. In fact, in Fig. 3
we see that several months later the Party uses one of the images again on the front
page of The Black Panther, overlaying the image with text stating, ‘‘Youth makes the
revolution,’’ and ‘‘Liberation schools revolutionize the youth.’’
Images combining social programs, political orientation, and militant ideology
abound. A typical example would be Fig. 4, a poster with drawing of a female
recipient of free food and free shoes that also promotes specific political candidates.
Of course, politicians of all stripes capitalize on their ‘‘good deeds’’ to gain political
support. Such activity does not necessarily characterize a utilitarian strategy of
coercing support from people who are dependent on one’s programs. For example,
President Obama, who certainly hoped to gain some political points from the Supreme
Court’s upholding of the Affordable Care Act, certainly was not operating under a
strategy that assumes those with newly realized access to healthcare would feel forced
to vote for him or fear losing health benefits. However, this example also illustrates the
power of sole service provision. In a community neglected by the state where residents
have few options and opportunities, service recipients may feel a different degree of
pressure to participate in the political or militant activities of their providers. The
extent to which BPP service recipients felt such pressure cannot be truly understood
until research is conducted with a large sample of former service recipients.
Still, the evidence of coercion in an explicit form, as opposed to more typical
political activity, appears weak. Stated differently, there is a difference between
providing services solely for the strategic purpose of gaining support, and happening to
generate support because you provide needed services. In our assessment, evidence
indicates the Panthers fall more so in the latter category. When asked if the Party
offered services in order to increase its membership, one former Party member
describes it thus:

123

458

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

Fig. 2 Lil’ brother checking in
for breakfast. From: April 27,
1969, The Black Panther, Vol.
III No. I, p. unknown

That is the goal of any organization; you want your organization to grow. For
example, before Coke introduced Coke Zero they assumed that they already
had a superior product in Coke, but they still had to promote Coke Zero and
now Coke Zero is surpassing Pepsi. Coke’s media campaign, commercials,
and propaganda to sell Coke Zero worked. The BPP was similar, they had a
product and they felt that if you taste some of this product you would like it.
So they tried to promote their product. There is nothing wrong with that…the
masons do it all the time! The BPP had a product that they thought would
benefit the black community and would represent black people. And they did
have a good product, but they didn’t realize how much power the government
had to stop them. So going into a program primarily of caring for people and
love, then having the government say that they are militant organization, kind
of contradicts what their purpose is.
In fact, when interview participants provide evidence of having been ‘‘recruited,’’
they have been recruited to doing community service. As one former BPP service
recipient explains,

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

459

Fig. 3 The Black Panther.
From: August 2, 1969, The
Black Panther, Vol. III No. 14,
p. 1

I wouldn’t be the person I am today if I can’t go back and see the values that
were instilled in me. I mean, I got a militant side, but I feed people every day
at the school. I go and buy 4 or 5 cases of Top Ramen because the kids do not
eat at the school. It’s kind of a microcosm of what the BPP was about, but I
know that sometimes this is the first thing that they ate since lunch time
yesterday. Even now, students are dependent on free breakfast and lunch
because their families can’t afford to feed them.

Social Problems as Oppression: Social Services as Revolution
What seems prevalent in the data we have gathered is evidence that social services
are not used as a utilitarian tool of recruitment, but rather are constructed by the
community and the Party as a form of activism, not unlike political activism and
violent activism. We find a fusion of concepts of violence and services as two means
of reaching similar ends. Craig Rice writes in The Black Panther,
The Panthers held to a very detailed agenda that embraced a militant-style
defense of the minority communities, not just against the U.S. government as
was promoted by the mainstream press, but against all negative forces in the
world. They promoted self-defense against hunger, self-defense against

123

460

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

Fig. 4 The Black Panther.
From: May 27, 1972, The Black
Panther, Vol. 8 No. 10, p. 77

addiction, self-defense against poverty. They established programs to address
critical issues like the breakfast program for school children and the free
health clinics, and gave a voice to those who had never been heard before. It
made us think and see in a panoramic vision (p. xvi–xvii.).
This theme of self-defense is ubiquitous in BPP depictions of social services,
political activity, and militant activity alike. As authors of the The Black Panther
note in an article seeking volunteers for the free breakfast program, ‘‘Hunger is one
of the means of oppression and it must be halted. POWER TO THE PEOPLE.’’
(Sunday April 27, 1969, p. 3). In fighting social problems, the Panthers and their
communities saw the Party as fighting a state that at best neglected the community
and at worst, oppressed and victimized the community. Caring acts of service
provision are framed as radical, openly referred to as a step in the process of
revolution, as seen in this text following a list of services provided by the BPP in
The Black Panther:
All these programs satisfy the deep needs of the community but they are not
solutions to our problems. That is why we call them survival programs,
meaning survival pending revolution. (The Black Panther, April 5, 1975.
P. 27)

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

461

Social services are portrayed as a tool that can build the strength necessary to
survive and overthrow the current state, and then build a better one. The depiction of
basic services such as food provision as integral to the revolution can be seen in the
excerpt below.
These Breakfasts include every nutrient that they (the children) need for the
day. For too long have our people gone hungry and without the proper health
aids they need. But the Black Panther Party says that this type of thing must be
halted, because we must survive this evil government and build a new one fit
for the service of all people. (The Black Panther, April 27, 1969, page 3.)
Similarly, acts by armed cadre that an outsider might frame as militant are
viewed by the community as acts of kindness and love. Consider the following story
told by an interview participant:
I can remember personally that it was a big white cop named ‘‘Big Red.’’ He
came in and kicked in my mom’s door looking for my dad…I was probably 7
(years old) when they kicked in the door. Then no less than ten minutes later
there were about 15 Black Panthers that came to take pictures of the door.
They had weapons back then and it was okay to carry weapons as long as they
weren’t concealed. From that point that’s when I saw it as an organization that
was really helping the community because they would march from Peralta
Street down to the Village all the time to handle the needs of the community.
The Panthers were a presence that helped this interviewee gain a sense of safety as a
child. Feeling safe in the community in which you live is pertinent to sound mental
health, especially during a child’s developmental years. Safety is the second step on
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs; however, it has been argued that it could be
considered as a primary basic need. This may in part explain why, although the tenpoint program as a political statement did not address police brutality until point
number 7, in actuality patrolling the police was one of the first programs undertaken
by the BPP. This point is further explained by a former BPP service recipient,
Most of the police did not live in the community in which they worked. They
do not know our culture and they treated us like we were less than human.
Black people really needed to stand up for themselves and I think the BPP
encompassed all of that. It gave us power; it gave us a sense of pride, cultural
pride, and sense of community. With all of those aspects the bonus was that
we knew we had somebody to protect us.
The need for protection was a reoccurring theme for some residents as encounters
with the police became a part of daily life. This story told by a former BPP service
recipient captures the everyday ‘‘ordinary’’ acts that may be taken for granted in
communities untouched by the effects of poverty:
The BPP helped people to feel a sense of pride and belonging. Here is an
organization that would fix doors and windows. The stuff that we saw them do
was totally different then how they were portrayed in the media. In the Village
one weekend we had a stage built. The Party had singers and performers come

123

462

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

into the community to put on a show. Then one time they got a couple of buses
and took us all to the beach. They were doing stuff in the community that we
never expected. We stayed in West Oakland; we never really got out of the
area. Not until I was grown did I know the world was bigger than west
Oakland. Not too many of us can say that we’ve been out of California.
Accounts of generosity, service, and violence are interwoven with one another in
service recipients’ narratives, as integrated and congruous parts of the same story,
We would walk from the Village right across the street and eat breakfast. The
breakfast was hot food: bacon, eggs, and grits. We were eating nice. And then
you look around and you see leather coats everywhere. …The breakfast program.
There were times when my dad used to get up early in the morning and head out.
I did not know where he was going but he would have on his Party Uniform and
be gone. As I got older they started having a lot of activities at Bobby Hutton
Park. We used to walk from here go to the park and go swimming…Back the
other way was the railroad. The older guys used to go hit the trains and it was
crazy sometimes because the train used to pull up and somehow the doors on the
train would be open and people would find weapons. It makes you wonder how a
train carrying weapons just be open and people would just take the weapons. In
hindsight, looking back it was a set up to steal the weapons.
The BPP used multiple ways to discern the needs of the community. Information
could be gathered and shared by promoting community events. The needs of the
community were also explained through everyday exchanges with members and
individuals in the community. In this story, a former Party member describes how
they assessed the needs of the community:
In surveying the community we were able to discern what people needed and
people would tell you what they needed. Sometimes it was far-fetched and
sometimes it was common sense stuff. Just like the breakfast program. Why did
we have to be the ones to start the breakfast program? There was people way
before us doing this but we merged education and nutrition together. Why
didn’t anyone else do that? There was no self-interest in that because it was
dealing with black people. Why didn’t the government deal with sickle cell
anemia before the BPP? Because there was no self-interest in that. There was
no self-interest in having free medical clinics. We had free medical clinics for
the community, we did not ask you who your daddy was, or if you have the
same last name as momma, or how many people were in your family. If you
were hurt or injured you would come on down to the clinic as we had nurses,
doctors, who would treat you if they could, and if not, we had a referral service.
So out of the 11 free medical clinics, there are two still open to this day: Seattle
Washington and New Orleans are still serving the community to this day.
In contextualizing the experiences of these interviewees, we have an additional
lens to see the ways in which poverty and oppression touched communities as well
as individual lives. The BPP created a multi-structured format to address the unique
problems of a marginalized community. These narratives capture the essence of the

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

463

Party’s ability to impact individual lives in a meaningful way. This is evidenced by
those who joined the Party and found a sense of purpose, and also those living in the
communities who may have benefited simply from not having to worry about where
their next meal would come from. In the shadow of the complex historical analysis,
individual needs are often lost; yet, it is these individuals who make up the history,
society, and organizations that we study and write about.
Government Failure: Service in the Context of State Neglect and State
Oppression
Weisbrod’s (1977) theory of government failure is an oft-cited explanation for the rise
of non-state service providers. This theory is an extension of economists’ discussions
of inability of markets to supply sufficient public goods, with ‘‘market failure’’ often
cited as the chief explanation for the emergence of government. Weisbrod (1977)
follows upon this by explaining that while government meets the median voters’
demands for public goods, in communities with a diversity of preferences (particularly
minority communities), a large number of demands for public goods will remain
unmet (Rose-Ackerman, 1996). This ‘‘government failure’’ causes non-state actors to
emerge in order to supply these goods and services (Weisbrod, 1977). In a context of
state neglect and even state oppression, one can imagine this gap would lead to nonstate actors emerging to provide goods and services needed by the population. The
importance of state neglect and state oppression in the Panther’s service provision is
often described in the Party’s writings.
The absence of police protection and the presence of police oppression is a common
theme reported in relation to provision of services by the BPP. In a story about the
Seniors Against a Fearful Environment (S.A.F.E.) program, the authors report,
On the days that seniors go to the banks to cash their social security and
pension checks, they are sometimes mugged. Since the police department does
not do its job, we have initiated S.A.F.E. …When seniors asked the Oakland
Police Department for more protection, they received only suggestions: ‘‘Walk
closer to the curb, away from buildings.’’ Recently, the Oakland City Council
gave the police department over 455,000 for another police helicopter that will
patrol the city from the air while senior citizens are being mugged on the
ground. These acts show the gross unconcern the city government has for the
aged. (The Black Panther, Dec. 16, 1972. p.3).
The prevalence of police abuse and brutality is cited repeatedly as the impetus of the
BPP taking up arms, and the arms are depicted as allowing the Panthers to provide
an additional service of protection. One former BPP member explains,
The BPP did not start primarily because of police. From what I remember, the
BPP started out of necessity. …The BPP set out to help blacks. Where the
militant part came in was when they found out that it was legal to carry a
weapon as long as it was not concealed. They took that and ran with it. If you
have ever held a gun in your hand there is just so much power you get. … You

123

464

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

start thinking about who was messing with you, whoever did you wrong…this
is the equalizer. I think that was how the BPP looked at it, as an equalizer. The
weapons were not an excuse to go and blast people, but need be we have
something to make us just as equal as the police. They were causing harm to
us so the BPP marched around with their weapons out to let the community
know that they were protected.
Panther reports about other types of service provision that are also replete with
accusations of government neglect. In an appeal for volunteers for the school
breakfast program, authors write, ‘‘The Board of Education should have had this
program instituted a long time ago. How can our children learn anything when most
of their stomachs are empty?’’ (The Black Panther, Sunday April 27, 1969 p. 19).
An former BPP member interviewed reports, ‘‘For example, we tested over a
million black people for sickle cell anemia. The government had been aware of the
disease but did nothing about it.’’ Similar examples abound. In a scathing critique of
the public education system, the Party reports,
The (Intercommunal Youth) Institute was initiated in direct response to the public
school system, which has systematically produced individuals totally incapable of
thinking in an analytical way. The failure of the public school system to educate
Black and poor youth has caused generation after generation of our people to be
inadequately prepared to participate and survive in our highly technological
society. In order to begin to break this seemingly endless cycle of oppression, the
Black Panther Party established the Youth Institute (Hilliard, 2008).
The numerous examples of government neglect and oppression reported by the
Panthers and widely recognized historically are well-aligned with Weisbrod’s
theory of government failure, which would support the development of alternative
non-state institutions of meet local needs. Given this, it seems that the threat to the
state posed by the BPP was one of the government’s own creation.
Conclusion
Understanding the role of service provision in general and the BPP specifically is not a
clear-cut endeavor. In many ways state neglect acted as an incubator to birth a
revolution, as in the case of the Oakland BPP. For example, one might consider the
earlier example presented by an interview participant about an unlawful entry into a
residential home where children live by the officer known as ‘‘Big Red.’’ As the account
is relayed here, there was no warrant for entry and no place to later file a grievance for a
perceived wrong. What choices do such situations leave for individuals living in that
community who want to participate as citizens vis-à-vis legitimate state actors? Very
few perhaps, as one of the former Party members interviewed attempted to explain,
We made a lot of mistakes with some of the tactical aspects of the Party but the
goals, principles, and platform are still relevant today as they were back then.
Every racial group needs to grab them a ten point program. I mean, the system is
not going to recognize peoples’ human rights, especially working class folks. If

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

465

you want human rights you have to be able to afford them…and they cost money.
We have to understand the bigger problems to be able to do anything about it.
Talking about the BPP was not easy for all of the participants, and the emotions
came across in the interviews. Many recalled fallen comrades and those held as
political prisoners. For some, the Party was an assertion of manhood, providing a
place to reclaim a lost sense of self, while others joined the Party in their youth as
they were still developing a sense of identity. As such, we believe it is important to
represent this perspective of the interview participants as well.
The mission was to empower the Black community thorough love, community
values, through breakfast program, anything that they did to bring us together.
Their mission was to protect us, and our rights as human beings. Today, you
don’t feel like you belong to this country. Our country was educated by middle
class White people, and those people who founded the education system did
not have Blacks in mind when they created it. Thus, anything that you are
taught does not have us in it. As a result, we were always seen as less than
them. The BPP to me was an organization that said we mean something to the
world. The BPP taught the people that our ancestors made contribution to the
world, we are valued, and we are somebody. And that was too powerful for the
establishment to accept. That was too much power to give to Blacks. Until this
day we are still divided, some people think we are militant and the people who
know the truth know what the movement was all about.
For some, the Party engendered a sense of pride and for others, confusion and
fear. What is clear, however, is that the BPP offered social services in local
communities nationwide and made a rational attempt to provide protection given the
context of the communities in which they lived.
Our study’s strengths and its limitations stem from the strong focus on the
California Black Panther Party. The Oakland BPP created the 10-point platform as
an ideological tool that would further complicate the understanding of politics and
culture. While the history of the BPP has received some exploration, we have
attempted to show that it is often from an one-dimensional view that is incomplete.
The Black Panthers deserve further study, and the Oakland, BPP specifically
provides particularly fruitful ground for further study of the intersections of culture,
violence, social services, and politics. Second, an empirical survey that explores the
experiences of individuals living in local communities who may have received
services would be useful. Additionally, it will be valuable to explore other historical
and contemporary resistance organizations to shed light on the complex relationship
between state neglect, the experience of poverty, and the revolution that may ensue.
In the end, the revolutionary ideology and political pursuits of the BPP were a
mixture of rhetorical political statements and symbolic imagery that attempted to
synthesize ideas from a variety of sources, including socialism, Cold War politics, and
the thinking of Ernesto ‘‘Che’’ Guevara, Franz Fanon, Malcolm X, and Mao Zedong
(Alkebulan, 2007; Murch, 2010; Nelson, 2011). While violence and social services
may seem on the surface to stand in opposition to one another, both these served as
mechanisms to protect the community, engage in resistance, and serve the revolution.

123

466

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

Appendix 1: October 1966 Black Panther Party Platform and Program (often
referred to as the ‘‘Ten-Point Program’’ or the ‘‘Ten-Point Plan’’).
1.

We Want Freedom. We Want Power To Determine The Destiny Of Our Black
Community.
We believe that Black people will not be free until we are able to determine our destiny.

2.

We Want Full Employment For Our People.
We believe that the federal government is responsible and obligated to give
every man employment or a guaranteed income. We believe that if the White
American businessmen will not give full employment, then the means of
production should be taken from the businessmen and placed in the community
so that the people of the community can organize and employ all of its people
and give a high standard of living.

3.

We Want An End To The Robbery By The Capitalists Of Our Black Community.
We believe that this racist government has robbed us, and now we are demanding
the overdue debt of forty acres and two mules. Forty acres and two mules were
promised 100 years ago as restitution for slave labor and mass murder of Black
people. We will accept the payment in currency which will be distributed to our
many communities. The Germans are now aiding the Jews in Israel for the
genocide of the Jewish people. The Germans murdered six million Jews. The
American racist has taken part in the slaughter of over fifty million Black people;
therefore, we feel that this is a modest demand that we make.

4.

We Want Decent Housing Fit For The Shelter Of Human Beings.
We believe that if the White Landlords will not give decent housing to our
Black community, then the housing and the land should be made into
cooperatives so that our community, with government aid, can build and make
decent housing for its people.

5.

We Want Education For Our People That Exposes The True Nature Of This
Decadent American Society. We Want Education That Teaches Us Our True
History And Our Role In The Present-Day Society.
We believe in an educational system that will give to our people knowledge of
self. If a man does not have knowledge of himself and his position in society
and the world, then he has little chance to relate to anything else.

6.

We Want All Black Men To Be Exempt From Military Service.
We believe that Black people should not be forced to fight in the military
service to defend a racist government that does not protect us. We will not fight
and kill other people of color in the world who, like Black people, are being
victimized by the White racist government of America. We will protect
ourselves from the force and violence of the racist police and the racist military,
by whatever means necessary.

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

467

7.

We Want An Immediate End To Police Brutality And Murder Of Black People.
We believe we can end police brutality in our Black community by organizing
Black self-defense groups that are dedicated to defending our Black community
from racist police oppression and brutality. The Second Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States gives a right to bear arms. We, therefore,
believe that all Black people should arm themselves for self- defense.

8.

We Want Freedom For All Black Men Held In Federal, State, County And City
Prisons And Jails.
We believe that all Black people should be released from the many jails and
prisons because they have not received a fair and impartial trial.

9.

We Want All Black People When Brought To Trial To Be Tried In Court By A
Jury Of Their Peer Group Or People From Their Black Communities, As
Defined By The Constitution Of The United States.
We believe that the courts should follow the United States Constitution so that
Black people will receive fair trials. The Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S.
Constitution gives a man a right to be tried by his peer group. A peer is a person
from a similar economic, social, religious, geographical, environmental,
historical, and racial background. To do this the court will be forced to select
a jury from the Black community from which the Black defendant came. We
have been, and are being, tried by all-White juries that have no understanding of
the ‘‘average reasoning man’’ of the Black community.

10.

We Want Land, Bread, Housing, Education, Clothing, Justice, And Peace.
When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to
dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to
assume, among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which
the laws of nature and nature’s God entitled them, a decent respect of the
opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel
them to the separation.

We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are
endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. That, to secure these rights, governments are
instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed;
that, whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the
right of the people to alter or abolish it, and to institute a new government, laying its
foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to them
shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will
dictate that governments long established should not be changed for light and
transient causes; and, accordingly, all experience hath shown that mankind are more
disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing
the forms to which they are accustomed. But, when a long train of abuses and
usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to reduce them
under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such
government, and to provide new guards for their future security.

123

468

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

References
Abron, J. M. (1998). Serving the people: The survival programs of the black panther party. In C. E. Jones
(Ed.), The black panther party (reconsidered) (p. 174). Baltimore: Black Classic Press.
Alkebulan, P. (2007). Survival pending revolution: The history of the Black Panther Party. Tuscaloosa,
AL: The University of Alabama Press.
Austin, C. J. (2006). Up against the wall: Violence in the making and unmaking of the Black Panther
Party. Fayetteville, AR: University of Arkansas Press.
Baldwin, B. (2006). In the shadow of the gun: The Black Panther Party, the ninth amendment, and
discourses of self-defence. In J. Lazerow & Y. R. Williams (Eds.), In search of the Black Panther
Party: New perspectives on a revolutionary movement. Durham: Duke University Press.
Bloom, J., & Martin, W. (2013). Black against empire: The history and politics of the Black Panther
Party. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Cangilia, B. S., & Carmin, J. (2005). Scholarship on social movement organizations: Classic views and
emerging trends. Mobilization: An International Journal, 10(2), 201–212.
Chan, S. (1991). Asian Americans: An interpretive history. Boston: Twayne Publishers.
Cortés, M. (1995). Three strategic questions about Latino philanthropy. In C. H. Hamilton & W.
F. Ilchman (Eds.), Cultures of giving II: How heritage, gender, wealth and values influence
philanthropy (pp. 23–40). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Cronin, I. (2002). Confronting fear: A history of terrorism. New York: Thunder’s Mouth Press.
Davenport, C. (2010). Media bias, perspective, and state repression: The Black Panther Party. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Dyson, O. L. (2010). Nesting the Black Panther Party in the Zeitgeist of Uncertainty. In J. L. Jeffries
(Ed.), On the ground: The Black Panther Party in communities across America (p. 273). Jackson,
MI: University Press of Mississippi.
Dyson, O. L., Brooks, K. L., & Jeffries, J. L. (2007). Brotherly love can kill you: The Philadelphia branch
of the Black Panther Party. In J. L. Jeffries (Ed.), Comrades: A local history of the Black Panther
Party (p. 214). Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Fairfax, J. E. (1995). Black philanthropy: Its heritage and its future. In C. H. Hamilton & W. F. Ilchman
(Eds.), Cultures of giving II: How heritage, gender, wealth and values influence philanthropy (pp.
9–21). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Fawaz, M. M. (2000). Agency and ideology in the service provision of Islamic organizations in the
southern suburb of Beirut, Lebanon. Paper read at NGOs and Governance in the Arab Countries,
Conference in Cairo, Egypt.
Fearon, J., & Laitin, D. (2003). Ethnicity, insurgency, and civil war. American Political Science Review.,
97(1), 75–90.
Flanigan, S. T. (2006). Charity as resistance: Connections between charity, contentious politics, and
terror. Studies in Conflict & Terrorism, 29(7), 641–655.
Flanigan, S. (2008). Nonprofit service provision by insurgent organizations—The cases of Hizballah and
the Tamil Tigers. Studies in Conflict and Terrorism, 31(6), 499–519.
Flanigan, S., & Abdel-Samad, M. (2009). Hezbollah’s social Jihad: Nonprofits as resistance
organizations. Middle East Policy, 16(2), 122–137.
Franklin, V. P. (1992). Black self-determination: A history of African American resistance. Brooklyn,
NY: Lawrence Hill Books.
Gamson, W. A. (1975). The strategy of social protest. Homewood, IL: Dorsey Press.
Gurr, T. (2000). People versus states: Minorities at risk in the new century. Washington, DC: United
States Institute of Peace Press.
Handler, J. F. (1973). The coercive social worker: British lessons for American social services. Chicago:
Rand McNally College Publishing Company.
Handler, J. F. (1979). Protecting the social service client: Legal and structural controls on official
discretion. New York: Academic Press.
Harik, J. P. (1996). Between Islam and the system: Sources and implications of popular support for
Lebanon’s Hizballah. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 40(1), 41–67.
Harik, J. P. (2004). Hezbollah: The changing face of terrorism. New York: I.B. Tauris.
Hasenfeld, Y. (1987). Power in social work practice. Social Service Review., 61(3), 469–483.
Heath, G. L., & Black Panther Party. (1976). Off the pigs!: The history and literature of the Black Panther
Party. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press.

123

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

469

Hilliard, D. (2008). The Black Panther Party: Service to the people programs. Albuquerque, NM:
University of New Mexico Press.
Hilliard, D., & Cole, L. (1993). This side of glory : The autobiography of David Hilliard and the story of
the Black Panther Party. Boston: Little, Brown.
Hoffman, B. (1998). Inside terrorism. New York: Columbia University Press.
Jeffries, J. L. (2006). Black power in the belly of the beast. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois.
Jeffries, J. L. (2007). Comrades: A local history of the Black Panther Party. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Jeffries, J. L. (2010). On the ground: The Black Panther Party in communities across America. Jackson,
MI: University Press of Mississippi.
Jeffries, J. L., & Nissim-Sabat, R. (2007). Painting a more complete portrait of the Black Panther Party. In
J. L. Jeffries (Ed.), Comrades: A local history of the Black Panther Party (p. 1). Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.
Johnson, P. D. (2006). Counseling African American men: A contextualized humanistic perspective.
Counseling & Values, 50(3), 187–196.
Jones, C. E., & Jeffries, J. L. (1998). Don’t believe the hype: Debunking the panther mythology. In C.
E. Jones (Ed), The Black Panther Party (reconsidered). Baltimore, CA: Black Classic Press.
Joseph, J. A. (1995). Remaking America: How the benevolent traditions of many cultures are
transforming our national life. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Joseph, P. E. (2010). Neighborhood rebels: Black power at the local level. Palgrave Macmillan.
Juergensmeyer, M. (2003). Terror in the mind of god: The global rise of religious violence. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Kosmin, B. A. (1995). New directions in contemporary Jewish philanthropy: The challenges for the
1990s. In C. H. Hamilton & W. F. Ilchman (Eds.), Cultures of giving II: How heritage, gender,
wealth and values influence philanthropy (pp. 279–308). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Levitt, M. (2004). Hamas from cradle to grave. Middle East Quarterly, 11(1), 1–12.
McCarthy, J. D., & Zald, M. N. (1977). Resource mobilization and social movements: A partial theory.
The American Journal of Sociology, 82(6), 1212–1241.
Murch, D. J. (2010). Living for the city: Migration, education, and the rise of the Black Panther Party in
Oakland. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Nelson, A. (2011). Body and soul: The Black Panther Party and the fight against medical discrimination.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Newton, H. P., & Blake, J. H. (2009; 1973). Revolutionary suicide. New York: Penguin Books.
Newton, H. P., & Morrison, T. (2009). To die for the people: The writings of Huey P. Newton. San
Francisco: City Lights Books.
Ongiri, A. A. (2010). Spectacular blackness: The cultural politics of the black power movement and the
search for a black aesthetic. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press.
O’Reilly, K. (1989). Racial matters : the FBI’s secret file on Black America, 1960–1972. New York/
London: Free Press/Collier Macmillan.
Piven, F. F., & Cloward, R. A. (1977). Poor people’s movements: Why they succeed, how they fail. New
York: Vintage Books.
Ranstorp, M. (1998). The strategy and tactics of Hizballah’s current ‘Lebanonization process’.
Mediterranean Politics, 3(1), 103–134.
Rhodes, J. (2007). Framing the Black Panthers: The spectacular rise of a black power icon. New York:
New Press (Distributed by W.W. Norton).
Rhomberg, C. (2004). No there there : Race, class, and political community in Oakland. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Rose-Ackerman, S. (1996). Altruism, nonprofits and economic theory. Journal of Economic Literature,
34(2), 701–726.
Seale, B. (1991; 1970). Seize the time: The story of the Black Panther Party and Huey P. Newton.
Baltimore, MD: Black Classic Press.
Self, R. O. (2003). American Babylon: Race and the struggle for postwar Oakland. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Shao, S. (1995). Asian American giving: Issues and challenges. In C. H. Hamilton & W. F. Ilchman
(Eds.), Cultures of giving II: How heritage, gender, wealth and values influence philanthropy (pp.
53–64). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Singh, N. P. (1998). The Black Panthers and the undeveloped country of the left. In C. E. Jones (Ed.), The
Black Panther Party (reconsidered) (p. 57). Baltimore: Black Classic Press.

123

470

Soc Just Res (2013) 26:445–470

Smith, B., Shue, S., Vest, J. L., & Villarreal, J. (1999). Philanthropy in communities of color.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Stern, J. (1999). The ultimate terrorists. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Tilly, C. (2003). The politics of collective violence. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Treverton, G., Gregg, H., Gibran, D., & Yost, C. (2005). Exploring religious conflict. Santa Monica, LA:
RAND Corporation.
Weisbrod, B. A. (1977). The voluntary nonprofit sector. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath & Co.
Witt, A. (2007). The Black Panthers in the Midwest: The community programs and services of the Black
Panther Party in Milwaukee, 1966–1977. New York: Routledge.

123

