2/17/26, 3:17 PM

Lenin's Karl Marx: V: Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat

Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

Karl Marx
A Brief Biographical Sketch With an Exposition of Marxism

Tactics of the Class Struggle of the
Proletariat
After examining, as early as 1844-45, one of the main shortcomings in the earlier
materialism—namely, its inability to understand the conditions or appreciate the
importance of practical revolutionary activity—Marx, along with his theoretical work,
devoted unremitting attention, throughout his lifetime, to the tactical problems of the
proletariat’s class struggle. An immense amount of material bearing on this is
contained in all the works of Marx, particularly in the four volumes of his
correspondence with Engels, published in 1913. This material is still far from having
been brought together, collected, examined and studied. We shall therefore have to
confine ourselves here to the most general and brief remarks, emphasizing that Marx
justly considered that, without this aspect, materialism is incomplete, onesided, and
lifeless. The fundamental task of proletarian tactics was defined by Marx in strict
conformity with all the postulates of his materialist-dialectical Weltanschauung
[“world-view”]. Only an objective consideration of the sum total of the relations
between absolutely all the classes in a given society, and consequently a consideration
of the objective stage of development reached by that society and of the relations
between it and other societies, can serve as a basis for the correct tactics of an
advanced class. At the same time, all classes and all countries are regarded, not
statically, but dynamically —i.e., not in a state of immobility—but in motion (whose
laws are determined by the economic conditions of existence of each class). Motion,
in its turn, is regarded from the standpoint, not only of the past, but also of the
future, and that not in the vulgar sense it is understood in by the “evolutionists”, who
see only slow changes, but dialectically: “...in developments of such magnitude 20
years are no more than a day,“ Marx wrote to Engels, “thought later on there may
come days in which 20 years are embodied” (Briefwechsel, Vol. 3, p. 127).[2]
At each stage of development, at each moment, proletarian tactics must take
account of this objectively inevitable dialectics of human history, on the one hand,
utilizing the periods of political stagnation or of sluggish, so-called “peaceful”
development in order to develop the class-consciousness, strength and militancy of
the advanced class, and, on the other hand, directing all the work of this utilization
https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1914/granat/ch05.htm

1/5

2/17/26, 3:17 PM

Lenin's Karl Marx: V: Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat

towards the “ultimate aim” of that class’s advance, towards creating in it the ability to
find practical solutions for great tasks in the great days, in which “20 years are
embodied”. Two of Marx’s arguments are of special importance in this connection:
one of these is contained in The Poverty of Philosophy, and concerns the economic
struggle and economic organizations of the proletariat; the other is contained in the
Communist Manifesto and concerns the asks of the proletariat. The former runs as
follows:
“Large-scale industry concentrates in one place a crowd of people unknown to one
another. Competition divides their interests. But the maintenance of wages, this
common interest which they have against their boss, unites them in a common thought
of resistance—combination.... Combinations, at first isolated, constitute themselves
into groups ... and in face of always united capital, the maintenance of the association
becomes more necessary to them [i.e., the workers] than that of wages.... In this
struggle—a veritable civil war—all the elements necessary for a coming battle unite and
develop. Once it has reached this point, association takes on a political character.
(Marx, The Poverty of Philosopy, 1847)

Here we have the programme and tactics of the economic struggle and of the trade
union movement for several decades to come, for all the lengthy period in which the
proletariat will prepare its forces for the “coming battle.” All this should be compared
with numerous references by Marx and Engels to the example of the British labor
movement, showing how industrial “property” leads to attempts “to buy the
proletariat” (Briefwechsel, Vol. 1, p. 136).[3] to divert them from the struggle; how
this prosperity in general “demoralizes the workers” (Vol. 2, p. 218); how the British
proletariat becomes “bourgeoisified”—“this most bourgeois of all nations is
apparently aiming ultimately at the possession of a bourgeois aristocracy and a
bourgeois proletariat alongside the bourgeoisie” Chartists (1866; Vol. 3, p. 305)[4];
how the British workers’ leaders are becoming a type midway between “a radical
bourgeois and a worker” (in reference to Holyoak, Vol. 4, p. 209); how, owning to
Britain’s monopoly, and as long as that monopoly lasts, “the British workingman will
not budge” (Vol. 4, p. 433).[5] The tactics of the economic struggle, in connection
with the general course (and outcome) of the working-class movement, are
considered here from a remarkably broad, comprehensive, dialectical, and genuinely
revolutionary standpoint.
The Communist Manifesto advanced a fundamental Marxist principle on the
tactics of the political struggle:
“The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, for the
enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class; but in the movement of
the present, they also represent and take care of the future of that movement.” That
was why, in 1848, Marx supported the party of the “agrarian revolution” in Poland,
“that party which brought about the Krakow insurrection in 1846.”[1]

https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1914/granat/ch05.htm

2/5

2/17/26, 3:17 PM

Lenin's Karl Marx: V: Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat

In Germany, Marx, in 1848 and 1849, supported the extreme revolutionary
democrats, and subsequently never retracted what he had then said about tactics. He
regarded the German bourgeoisie as an element which was “inclined from the very
beginning to betray the people” (only an alliance with the peasantry could have
enabled the bourgeoisie to completely achieve its aims) “and compromise with the
crowned representatives of the old society.” Here is Marx’s summing-up of the
German bourgeois-democratic revolution—an analysis which, incidentally, is a
sample of a materialism that examines society in motion, and, moreover, not only
from the aspect of a motion that is backward:
“Without faith in itself, without faith in the people, grumbling at those above,
trembling before those below ... intimidated by the world storm ... no energy in any
respect, plagiarism in every respect ... without initiative ... an execrable old man who
saw himself doomed to guide and deflect the first youthful impulses of a robust people
in his own senile interests....” (Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 1848; see Literarischer
Nachlass, Vol. 3, p. 212.)[6]

About 20 years later, Marx declared, in a letter to Engels (Briefwechsel, Vol. 3,
p.224), that the Revolution of 1848 had failed because the bourgeoisie had preferred
peace with slavery to the mere prospect of a fight for freedom. When the
revolutionary period of 1848-49 ended, Marx opposed any attempt to play at
revolution (his struggle against Schapper and Willich), and insisted on the ability to
work in a new phase, which in a quasi-“peaceful” way was preparing new revolutions.
The spirit in which Marx wanted this work to be conducted is to be seen in his
appraisal of the situation in Germany in 1856, the darkest period of reaction: “The
whole thing in Germany will depend on the possibility of backing the proletarian
revolution by some second edition of the Peasant War” (Briefwechsel, Vol. 2, p. 108).
[7]

While the democratic (bourgeois) revolution in Germany was uncompleted, Marx
focused every attention, in the tactics of the socialist proletariat, on developing the
democratic energy of the peasantry. He held that Lassalle’s attitude was “objectively...
a betrayal of the whole workers’ movement to Prussia” (Vol. 3, p.210), incidentally
because Lassalle was tolerant of the Junkers and Prussian nationalism.
“In a predominantly agricultural country,” Engels wrote in 1865, in exchanging
views with Marx on their forthcoming joint declaration in the press, “...it is dastardly
to make an exclusive attack on the bourgeoisie in the name of the industrial
proletariat but never to devote a word to the patriarchal exploitation of the rural
proletariat under the lash of the great feudal aristocracy” (Vol. 3, p. 217).[8]
From 1864 to 1870, when the period of the consummation of the bourgeoisdemocratic revolution in Germany was coming to an end, a period in which the
Prussian and Austrian exploiting classes were struggling to complete that revolution
in one way or another from above, Marx not only rebuked Lassalle, who was
coquetting with Bismarck, but also corrected Liebknecht, who had “lapsed into
Austrophilism” and a defense of particularism; Marx demanded revolutionary tactics
https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1914/granat/ch05.htm

3/5

2/17/26, 3:17 PM

Lenin's Karl Marx: V: Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat

which would combat with equal ruthlessness both Bismarck and the Austrophiles,
tactics which would not be adapted to the “victor”—the Prussian Junkers—but would
immediately renew the revolutionary struggle against him despite the conditions
created by the Prussian military victories (Briefwechsel, Vol. 3, pp. 134, 136, 147, 179,
204, 210, 215, 418, 437, 440-41).
In the celebrated Address of the International of September 9 1870, Marx warned
the French proletariat against an untimely uprising, but when an uprising
nevertheless took place (1871), Marx enthusiastically hailed the revolutionary
initiative of the masses, who were “storming heaven” (Marx’s letter to Kugelmann).
From the standpoint of Marx’s dialectical materialism, the defeat of revolutionary
action in that situation, as in many other, was a lesser evil, in the general course and
outcome of the proletarian struggle, than the abandonment of a position already
occupied, than surrender without battle. Such a surrender would have demoralised
the proletariat and weakened its militancy. While fully appreciating the use of legal
means of struggle during periods of political stagnation and the domination of
bourgeois legality, Marx, in 1877 and 1878, following the passage of the Anti-Socialist
Law,[9] sharply condemned Most’s “revolutionary phrases”; no less sharply, if not
more so, did he attack the opportunism that had for a time come over the official
Social-Democratic Party, which did not at once display resoluteness, firmness,
revolutionary spirit and the readiness to resort to an illegal struggle in response to the
Anti-Socialist Law (Briefwechsel, Vol. 4, pp. 397, 404, 418, 422, 424; cf. also letters to
Sorge).

Notes
[1]

The reference is to the democratic uprising for national liberation in the Krakow

Republic which in 1815 was placed under the joint control of Austria, Prussia and
Russia. The rebels set up a National Government which issued a manifesto
proclaiming abolition of feudal services and promising to give the peasants lands
without redemption. In its other proclamations it announced the establishment of
national workshops with higher wages and the introduction of equal rights for all
citizens. Soon, however, the uprising was suppressed.—Ed.
[2]

[PLACEHOLDER.]

[3]

[PLACEHOLDER.]

[4]

[PLACEHOLDER.]

https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1914/granat/ch05.htm

4/5

2/17/26, 3:17 PM

Lenin's Karl Marx: V: Tactics of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat

[5]

[PLACEHOLDER.]

[6]

[PLACEHOLDER.]

[7]

[PLACEHOLDER.]

[8]

[PLACEHOLDER.]

[9]

[PLACEHOLDER.]

Works Index | Volume 21 | Collected Works | L.I.A. Index
< backward

forward >

https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1914/granat/ch05.htm

5/5
