Copyright O 1983 by Cedric J. Robinson
All rights reserved
Foreword and preface copyright O 2000
The University of North Carolina Press
First published 1983 by Zed Press, 57 Caledonian Road,
London NI ~ D Nreprinted
;
zooo by the University of
North Carolina Press.
Designed by April Leidig-Higgins
Set in Minion type by Keystone Typesetting, Inc.
Manufactured in the United States of America
The paper in this book meets the guidelines for permanence and durability of the Committee on Production
Guidelines for Book Longevity of the Council on Library
Resources.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Robinson, Cedric J. Black marxism: the making of the
Black radical tradition 1 Cedric J. Robinson; foreword by
Robin D. G. Kelley; with a new preface by the author.
p.

cm. Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 0-8078-4829-8 (pbk.: alk. paper)

I. Communism-Africa.

2. Communism-Developing

countries. 3. Afro-American communists.

I. Title.

~ ~ 4 3 6 . 5 . ~ZOO0
6 3 335.43'0917'496-d~~l

99-30995 CIP

For Leonard and Gary,
for whom there was not enough time

The Dark Ages: Europe and Africa 85
Islam, Africa, and Europe 87
Europe and the Eastern Trade 89
Islam and the Making of Portugal 91
Islam and Eurocentrism 97

5

The Atlantic Slave Trade and African Labor 101
The Genoese Bourgeoisie and the Age of Discovery 103
Genoese Capital, the Atlantic, and a Legend 106
African Labor as Capital 109
The Ledgers of a World System 111
The Column Marked "British Capitalism" 116

6

The Historical Archaeology of the Black Radical Tradition 121
History and the Mere Slave 123
Reds, Whites, and Blacks 125
Black for Red 128
Black Resistance: The Sixteenth Century 130
Palmares and Seventeenth-Century Marronage 132
Black Resistance in North America 140
The Haitian Revolution 144
Black Brazil and Resistance 149
Resistance in the British West Indies 155
Africa: Revolt at the Source 164

7

The Nature of the Black Radical Tradition 167

Part 3

Black Radicalism and Marxist Theory

8

The Formation of an Intelligentsia 175
Capitalism, Imperialism, and the Black Middle Classes 177
Western Civilization and the Renegade Black Intelligentsia 181

9

Historiography and the Black Radical Tradition 185
Du Bois and the Myths of National History 185
Du Bois and the Reconstruction of History and American Political
Thought 195
Slavery and Capitalism 199
Labor, Capitalism, and Slavery 200
Slavery and Democracy 203
Reconstruction and the Black Elite 205
Du Bois, Marx, and Marxism 207
Bolshevism and American Communism 208
Black Nationalism 212
Blacks and Communism 218
Du Bois and Radical Theory 228

10

C. L. R. James a n d the Black Radical Tradition 241
Black Labor and the Black Middle Classes in Trinidad 241
The Black Victorian Becomes a Black Jacobin 251
British Socialism 257
Black Radicals in the Ivletropole 260
The Theory of the Black Jacobin 270
Coming to Terms with the Marxist Tradition 278

II

Richard Wright a n d the Critique of Class Theory 287
Marxist Theory and the Black Radical Intellectual 287
The Novel as Politics 291
Wright's Social Theory 293
Blacks as the Negation of Capitalism 299
The Outsider as a Critique of Christianity and Marxism 301

I2

An Ending 307

Notes 319
Bibliography 409
Index 431

FOREWORD

When black scholars hear t h e call t o equal o p p o r t u n i t y i n darkness,
they must remember t h a t they d o n o t belong i n t h e darkness o f an
American culture t h a t refuses t o move t o w a r d t h e light. They are n o t
meant t o be pliant captives and agents o f institutions t h a t deny light
all over t h e world. No, they must speak t h e t r u t h t o themselves and t o
t h e community and t o all who invite t h e m i n t o t h e new darkness. They
must a f f i r m t h e light, t h e l i g h t movement of t h e i r past, t h e light
movement of t h e i r people. They must a f f i r m t h e i r capacities t o move
forward t o w a r d new alternatives f o r light i n America.
-Vincent Harding, "Responsibilities of t h e Black Scholar t o
Community"

I can say, without a trace of hyperbole, that this book changed my life. Like a specter,
it has haunted me from the day I pulled it out of its brown padded envelope over
sixteen years ago to the moment I agreed to write this foreword. The long hours,
weeks, and months I agonized over this essay proved as exhilarating and frustrating
and anxiety-ridden as my first encounter with Cedric J. Robinson's magnum opus
during my first year in graduate school. It arrived out of the blue in the form of a
review copy sent to Ufahamu, a graduate student journal published by UCLA'S African
Studies Center. The book's appearance caught me off guard; none of my colleagues
had mentioned it, and I do not recall seeing any advertisements for it in any of the
scholarly journals with which we were familiar. Nevertheless, for me the timing was
fortuitous, if not downright cosmic. Just a few months into graduate school, I was
toying with the idea of writing a dissertation on the South African Left. The inspiration was hardly academic; I was more interested in becoming a full-time Communist
than a full-time scholar. I could not have cared less about historiography or the
current academic debates about social movements. I wanted to know how to build a
left-wing movement among people of color so that we could get on with the ultimate
task of making revolution.
So when I saw the title, Black Marxism: The Making of the Black Radical Tradition, I
could hardly contain myself. I had never heard of Cedric J. Robinson despite the fact
that he was a faculty member and director of the Center for Black Studies at the

neighboring University of California at Santa Barbara. Whoever he was, I thought to
myself, he was certainly well read: his footnotes could have been a separate book
altogether. Indeed, I was shocked at the size of the text (just shy of 500 pages and with
tiny, almost unreadable print to boot!) given my own futile search for materials on the
history of the Black Left, not just in Africa but throughout the Diaspora. I quickly
stuffed this unusually dense paperback into my bag and took it upon myself to read it
in my capacity as book review editor for Ufahamu.
When I finally got around to opening the book, I realized why it was so big. Black
Marxism is far more ambitious than its modest title implies, for what Cedric Robinson has written extends well beyond the history of the Black Left or Black radical
movements. Combining political theory, history, philosophy, cultural analysis, and
biography, among other things, Robinson literally rewrites the history of the rise of
the West from ancient times to the mid-twentieth century, tracing the roots of Black
radical thought to a shared epistemology among diverse African people and providing a withering critique of Western Marxism and its inability to comprehend either
the racial character of capitalism and the civilization in which it was born or mass
movements outside Europe. At the very least, Black Marxism challenges our "common sense" about the history of modernity, nationalism, capitalism, radical ideology,
the origins of Western racism, and the worldwide Left from the 1848 revolutions to
the present.
Perhaps more than any other book, Black Marxism shifts the center of radical
thought and revolution from Europe to the so-called "peripheryn-to the colonial
territories, marginalized colored people of the metropolitan centers of capital, and
those Frantz Fanon identified as the "wretched of the earth." And it makes a persuasive case that the radical thought and practice which emerged in these sites of colonial
and racial capitalist exploitation were produced by cultural logics and epistemologies
of the oppressed as well as the specific racial and cultural forms of domination. Thus
Robinson not only decenters Marxist history and historiography but also what one
might call the "eye of the storm."
Yet for all of Robinson's decentering, he begins his story in Europe. While this
might seem odd for a book primarily concerned with African people, it becomes clear
very quickly why he must begin there, if only to remove the analytical cataracts from
our eyes. This book is, after all, a critique of Western Marxism and its failure to
understand the conditions and movements of Black people in Africa and the Diaspora. Robinson not only exposes the limits of historical materialism as a way of
understanding Black experience but also reveals that the roots of Western racism took
hold in European civilization well before the dawn of capitalism. Thus, several years
before the recent explosion in "whiteness studies," Robinson proposed the idea that
the racialization of the proletariat and the invention of whiteness began within Europe itself, long before Europe's modern encounter with African and New World
labor. Such insights give the "Dark Ages" new meaning. Despite the almost axiomatic
tendency in European historiography to speak of early modern working classes in
national terms-English, French, and so forth-Robinson argues that the "lower
xii

FOREWORD

orders" usually were comprised of immigrant workers from territories outside the
nations in which they worked. These immigrant workers were placed at the bottom of
a racial hierarchy. The Slavs and the Irish, for example, were among Europe's first
"niggers," and what appears before us in nineteenth-century U.S. history as their
struggle to achieve whiteness is merely the tip of an iceberg several centuries old.'
Robinson not only finds racialism firmly rooted in premodern European civilization but locates the origins of capitalism there as well. Building on the work of
the Black radical sociologist Oliver Cromwell Cox, Robinson directly challenges the
Marxist idea that capitalism was a revolutionary negation of fe~dalism.~
Instead,
Robinson explains, capitalism emerged within the feudal order and grew in fits and
starts, flowering in the cultural soil of the West-most notably in the racialism that
has come to characterize European society. Capitalism and racism, in other words,
did not break from the old order but rather evolved from it to produce a modern
world system of "racial capitalism" dependent on slavery, violence, imperialism, and
genocide. So Robinson not only begins in Europe; he also chips away at many of the
claims and assertions central to European historiography, particularly of the Marxist
and liberal varieties. For instance, Robinson's discussion of the Irish working class
enables him to expose the myth of a "universal" proletariat: just as the Irish were
products of popular traditions borne and bred under colonialism, the "English
working class of the colonizing British Isles was formed by Anglo-Saxon chauvinism,
a racial ideology shared across class lines that allowed the English bourgeoisie to rationalize low wages and mistreatment for the Irish. This particular form of English
racialism was not invented by the ruling class to divide and conquer (though it did
succeed in that respect); rather, it was there at the outset, shaping the process ofproletarianization and the formation of working-class consciousness. Finally, in this living
feudal order, socialism was born as an alternative bourgeois strategy to combat social
inequality. Directly challenging Marx himself, Robinson declares: "Socialist critiques
of society were attempts to further the bourgeois revolutions against fe~dalism."~
There is yet another reason for Robinson to begin in the heart of the West. It was
there-not Africa-that the "Negro" was first manufactured. This was no easy task, as
Robinson reminds us, since the invention ofthe Negro-and by extension the fabrication ofwhiteness and all the policing of racial boundaries that came with it-required
"immense expenditures ofpsychic and intellectual energies in the West" (4). Indeed, a
group of European scholars expended enormous energy rewriting of the history of
the ancient world. Anticipating Martin Bernal's Black Athena: The Afioasiatic Roots of
Classical Civilization, Vol. I (1987) and building on the pioneering scholarship of
Cheikh Anta Diop, George G. M. James, and Frank Snowden, Robinson exposes the
efforts of European thinkers to disavow the interdependence between ancient Greece
and North Africa. This generation of "enlightened European scholars worked hard
to wipe out the cultural and intellectual contributions of Egypt and Nubia from
European history, to whiten the West in order to maintain the purity of the "European" race. They also stripped all of Africa of any semblance of "civilization," using
the printed page to eradicate African history and thus reduce a whole continent and
FOREWORD

xiil

its progeny to little more than beasts of burden or brutish heathens. Although efforts
to reconnect the ancient West with North Africa have recently come under a new
wave of attacks by scholars like Mary Lefkowitz, Robinson shows why these connections and the debates surrounding them are so i m p ~ r t a n tIt. ~is not a question of
"superiority" or the "theft" of ideas or even a matter of proving that Africans were
"civilized." Rather, Black Marxism reminds us again today, as it did sixteen years ago,
that the exorcising of the Black Mediterranean is about the fabrication of Europe as a
discrete, racially pure entity solely responsible for modernity, on the one hand, and
the fabrication of the Negro, on the other. In this respect, Robinson's intervention
parallels that of Edward Said's Orientalism, which argues that the European study of
and romance with the "East" was primarily about constructing the O ~ c i d e n t . ~
At the very same moment European labor was being thrown off the land and
herded into a newly formed industrial order, Robinson argues, African labor was
being drawn into the orbit of the world system through the transatlantic slave trade.
European civilization, either through feudalism or the nascent industrial order, did
not simply penetrate African village culture. To understand the dialectic of African
resistance to enslavement and exploitation, in other words, we need to look outside
the orbit of capitalism-we need to look West and Central African culture. Robinson
observes, "Marx had not realized fully that the cargoes of laborers also contained
African cultures, critical mixes and admixtures of language and thought, of cosmology and metaphysics, of habits, beliefs, and morality. These were the actual terms of
their humanity. These cargoes, then, did not consist of intellectual isolates or deculturated Blacks-men, women, and children separated from their previous universe.
African labor brought the past with it, a past that had produced it and settled on it the
first elements of consciousness and comprehension" (121).
Therefore, the first waves of African New World revolts were governed not by a
critique of Western society but rather a total rejection of the experience of enslavement and racism. More intent on preserving a past than transforming Western
society or overthrowing capitalism, they created maroon settlements, ran away, became outliers, and tried to find a way home, even if it meant death. However, with
the advent of formal colonialism and the incorporation of Black labor into a more
fully governed social structure, a more direct critique of the West and colonialism
emerged-a revolt set on transforming social relations and revolutionizing Western
society rather then reproducing African social life. The contradictions of colonialism
produced the native bourgeoisie, more intimate with European life and thought,
whose assigned task was to help rule. Trained to be junior partners in the colonial
state, members of this bourgeoisie experienced both racism from Europeans and a
deep sense of alienation from their native lives and cultures. Their contradictory role
as victims of racial domination and tools in the empire, as Western educated elites
feeling like aliens among the dominant society as well as among the masses, compelled some of these men and women to revolt, thus producing the radical Black
intelligentsia. It is no accident that many of these radicals and scholars emerged
both during the First World War, when they recognized the vulnerability of Western
xiv FOREWORD

civilization, and the second world crisis-the international depression and the rise
of fascism.
The emergence of this Black radical intelligentsia is the focus of the third and final
section of Black Marxism. Examining the lives and selected works of W. E. B. Du Bois,
C. L. R. James, and Richard Wright, Robinson's engagement with these three thinkers extends far beyond intellectual biography and critique. Taking us on a journey
through two centuries of U.S. and Diaspora history, Robinson revisits the revolutionary processes of emancipation that caught the eyes of these men. He demonstrates
how each of these figures came through an apprenticeship with Marxism, was deeply
affected by the crisis in world capitalism and the responses of workers' and anticolonial movements, and produced, in the midst of depression and war, important
books that challenged Marxism and tried to grapple with the historical consciousness
embedded in the Black Radical Tradition. Du Bois, James, and Wright eventually
revised their positions on Western Marxism or broke with it altogether and, to
differing degrees, embraced Black radicalism. The way they came to the Black Radical
Tradition was more of an act of recognition than invention; they did not create the
theory of Black radicalism as much as found it, through their work and study, in the
mass movements of Black p e ~ p l e . ~

I finally completed my first reading of Black Marxism about two months after I took it
home. The book so overwhelmed me that I suffered a crisis in confidence. I never
wrote the review-thus contributing unwittingly to the conspiracy of silence that has
surrounded the book since its publication. Instead, I phoned Professor Robinson and
virtually begged him to take me on as his student. He agreed and played a formative
role in shaping my dissertation (which, coincidentally, was published by the University of North Carolina Press a decade ago as Hammer and Hoe: Alabama Communists
during the Great Depression) and all of my work thereafter.
Although his book scared me to death, Cedric the teacher turned out to be remarkably humble, straightforward, down-to-earth, and generous with his time and energy.
A demanding reader, to be sure, he ranks among the warmest, funniest characters one
could ever meet in this profession-and his subtle sense of humor finds its way even
into Black Marxism's most difficult passages. What also amazes me is that Professor
Robinson was still in his thirties when he published Black Marxism, a book which
would have compelled even the great Du Bois to take a seat and listen.
Like Du Bois and the other subjects of his book, Robinson's political work on
behalf of Black liberation sent him to the library in search of the Black Radical
Tradition. His ideas evolved directly out of the social movements in which he took
part and the key social and political struggles that have come to define our era. For
example, as an undergraduate at the University of California at Berkeley during the
mid-i96os, Robinson was active in the Afro-American Association, a radical nationalist student group based in California's East Bay and led by Donald Warden. Founded
in 1962, the Association became the basis for the California chapter of the RevolutionFOREWORD

xv

ary Action Movement (RAM); some of its members, including Huey Newton, went on
to form the Black Panther Party. This small but militant group of Bay-area Black
intellectuals drew many of their ideas from Malcolm X and other Black nationalists,
and they were deeply influenced by revolutions in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
Although they directed their attention to domestic problems such as urban poverty,
racism, education, police brutality, and Black student struggles, they understood the
African American condition through an analysis of global capitalism, imperialism,
and Third World liberati~n.~
It is hard not to see the links between Black Marxism and Robinson's formative
experiences in the Afro-American Association. One of the key documents circulating
among this group was Harold Cruse's 1962 essay, "Revolutionary Nationalism and the
Afro-American," which argued that Black people in the United States were living
under domestic colonialism and that their struggles must be seen as part of the
worldwide anticolonial movement. "The failure of American Marxists," he writes, "to
understand the bond between the Negro and the colonial peoples of the world has led
to their failure to develop theories that would be of value to Negroes in the United
States." Cruse reversed the traditional argument that the success of socialism in the
developed West is key to the emancipation of colonial subjects and the development
of socialism in the Third World. Instead, he saw the former colonies as the vanguard
of the new socialist revolution, with Cuba and China at the forefront: "The revolutionary initiative has passed to the colonial world, and in the United States is passing
to the Negro, while Western Marxists theorize, temporize and debate."8 Robinson
took up Cruse's challenge to develop new theories of revolution where Marxism
failed, but he moved well beyond Cruse's positions. Eventually, Robinson came to the
conclusion that it is not enough to reshape or reformulate Marxism to fit the needs
of Third World revolution; instead, he believed all universalist theories of political
and social order had to be rejected. In fact, Robinson's first book, The Terms of
Order: Political Science and the Myth of Leadership, critiques the Western presumption-rooted as much in Marxism as in liberal democratic theory-that mass movements reflect social order and are maintained and rationalized by the authority
of leader~hip.~
The chaotic international political situation at the time Robinson was completing
Black Marxism was enough to dispel the myth of order. It was, after all, the last decade
of the Cold War, the era of Reaganism and Thatcherism and new imperialist wars in
the Middle East, Grenada, and the Falkland Islands. Yet the late 1970s and early 1980s
were also a new age of revolution. Dictatorships in Africa, Asia, and Latin America
were being challenged by radical movements from El Salvador to Zaire and Nicaragua
to South Africa. Political violence, torture, and assassinations seemed to proliferate in
the early 1980s; the casualties included the great Guyanese historian Walter Rodney,
an intellectual Robinson would certainly situate squarely within the Black Radical
Tradition. Let us not forget that under Reagan, the United States invaded Grenada in
1983 precisely because it had undergone its own socialist revolution four years earlier.
Closer to home, deindustrialization, the flight of American corporations to foreign
xvi

FOREWORD

lands, and the displacement of millions of workers across the country created further
turmoil in the metropolitan centers of global capital. Permanent unemployment,
underemployment, and homelessness became a way of life. And despite the growing
presence of African Americans in political office, city services declined, federal spending on cities dried up, and affirmative action programs came under assault. Racism
was also on the rise, resulting in urban rebellions from Liberty City, Florida, to the
English (and predominantly Black) suburbs of Bristol and Brixton. In the United
States, the Ku Klux Klan tripled its membership and waged a campaign of terror and
intimidation against African Americans. In Mississippi in 1980 (not isgo), at least
twelve African Americans were lynched, and at least forty racially motivated murders
occurred in cities as different as Buffalo, New York, Atlanta, Georgia, and Mobile,
Alabama. The era, in fact, saw police killings and nonlethal acts of brutality emerge as
central political issues among Black people on both sides of the Atlantic. Overall, the
Reagan and Thatcher years ushered in a new era of corporate wealth and callous
disregard for the poor and people of color.
This rightward drift did not go unchallenged, however. Black Marxism appeared
during a crucial period of political organizing, just a few years after the founding of
and the National Black Independent Political
the National Black United Front (NBUF)
Party (NBIPP).
Black nationalism was on the rise in this period, following a decade in
which an increasing number of Black radicals turned to Marxism-Leninism and
Maoism as alternatives to liberal integrationism and "race first" capitalism. During
the 197os, Black radicals took factory jobs to reach the working classes, sought to free
political prisoners and build prison movements, threw their energies behind building
a socialist Africa, and continued the long tradition of community-based organizing.
Meanwhile, Afrocentrism and cultural nationalism captured the imagination of various segments of the Black community across class lines. Independent Black schools
flourished; kinte cloth and red, black, and green medallions adorned brown bodies;
Afrocentric literature finally found its market. On the other hand, we had reason to be
pessimistic. By the 1980s the jobs disappeared, the most progressive African nations
were as unstable as ever, and the Black prison population was growing by leaps and
bounds thanks to mandatory sentencing policies for possession of crack cocaine.
So there I and other young radicals stood, at a political and cultural crossroads,
ready for action but unsure where the world was heading. We needed analyses of
social movements that had made a difference. We needed to know how we built
communities and kept ourselves whole in the midst of slavery and Jim Crow. We
needed to figure out who our friends and enemies were, past and present. We needed
new histories willing to adopt a more global perspective. In short, we needed a clearer,
more radical understanding of the past in order to chart the way forward. And Black
Marxism was one of several books written by Black radical intellectuals in the late
1970s and early 1980s to meet these challenges. Among the others were Chinweizu's
The West and the Rest of Us (1975)~Angela Davis's Women, Race, and Class (1981),
Vincent Harding's There Is a River (1983), V. P. Franklin's Black Self-Determination
(1984), Manning Marable's Blackwater (1981) and How Capitalism Underdeveloped
FOREWORD

XVii

Black America (1982), and Cornel West's Prophesy Deliverance (1982). For Black folk
with radical leanings, these were the new prophets of the era, and it seemed as if
everyone kept their ragged, marked up copies close to them. To the rest of the world,
however, these books barely existed. With few exceptions, they were initially ignored
in the mainstream, and sales fell below expectations. Even books published by commercial publishing houses, such as Chinweizu's biting and witty critique of Western
imperialism and its alliance with the African bourgeoisie, received very few reviews.1°
Black Marxism, in particular, garnered no major reviews and very little notice in
scholarly publications. The few reviews it did receive were mainly from left-leaning
publications or very specialized journals, and the only substantial review essays that
dealt with the book at length were written by Cornel West and the radical Black
philosopher Leonard Harris, with both published several years after the book appeared." West, whose very critical yet respectful essay in the socialist Monthly Review
was a deliberate effort to generate renewed interest Black Marxism, suggested that the
book "fell through the cracks" in large part due to the state of the academic Left,
which was lost in "jargon-ridden discourses in which race receives little or no attention," and the Black Left, which was simply too weak and disorganized to cultivate
and sustain a "high-level critical exchange."12
Whatever the reasons for the silence surrounding Black Marxism, the results have
been unfortunate. The Europeanists, whose historical scholarship Robinson challenges head-on, have never, to my knowledge, responded to his criticisms. Even the
new generation of scholars examining race and Black movements have paid scant
attention to Robinson's insights. The 1990s witnessed the proliferation of scholarship
on Black radicalism, the African Diaspora, the origins of Western racism, and the
writings of Du Bois, James, and Wright, yet very few of these studies cite Robinson's
work. One startling example is Winston James's Holding Aloft the Banner of Ethiopia:
Caribbean Radicalism in Early Twentieth Century America (1998). While Robinson's
book is much broader in chronology and scope, a portion of Black Marxism covers
the same ground as James's text. Robinson, like James, discusses the overwhelming
Caribbean presence in U.S.-based Black radical movements, examining groups like
the African Blood Brotherhood and the Universal Negro Improvement Association
and intellectuals including Hubert Harrison and Cyril Briggs. In some respects, Robinson's arguments prefigure some of James's claims; in other respects, the two are at
odds. Yet as prodigious and carefully researched as Holding Aloft the Banner of Ethiopia is (it is over 400 pages), Robinson is neither mentioned nor cited.13
Paul Gilroy's much acclaimed The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (1993) is also surprisingly quiet about Black Marxism. While Gilroy at least
acknowledges Robinson in his text,I4 Gilroy's lack of an extensive engagement or
dialogue with Robinson's work is quite jarring, since they explore much the same
ground. I think it is fair to say that parts of Black Marxism anticipate Gilroy's argument, for Robinson had established the centrality of African people in the creation of
the modern and premodern world. And he set the stage, in some respects, for Gilroy's

xvlii FOREWORD

notion of Black Atlantic culture as a "counterculture of modernity." "The rebellious
slaves," writes Robinson, "vitalized by a world-consciousness drawn from African
lore and composing their American experience into a rebellious art, had constituted
one of the crucial social bases in contradiction to bourgeois society" (314).Robinson
continued the earlier legacy of Diaspora studies but also developed a conception of
the Black Mediterranean as a precondition to the Black Atlantic and the making of
Europe itself. As for Gilroy's emphasis on the double consciousness and cultural
hybridity of New World Black intellectuals such as Wright and Du Bois, this recognition is fundamental to Robinson's argument about the radical petit bourgeoisie.
Indeed, drawing on the writings of Amilcar Cabral and the various musings of
C. L. R. James, Aim6 CCsaire, and others, Robinson demonstrates that their imbibing
of Western Civilization and their hybrid cultural lives were key to their radicalization.
When confronted with the limits of democracy under racial capitalism and colonialism and with the uprisings of the Black masses whose access to bourgeois European
culture was limited, the Black petit bourgeoisie was forced to choose sides. Abandoning the West was never an option, Robinson argues, but critiquing and challenging
it was.
Yet while Robinson and Gilroy grapple with many of the same questions, they do
have different agendas. Gilroy's point, and one of his most important critical interventions, is to show the analytical limits of cultural nationalism and ethnic absolutism. He demonstrates that Black people are products of the modern world, with a
unique historical legacy rooted in slavery; Blacks are hybrid people with as much
claim to the Western heritage as their former slave masters. Robinson, on the other
hand, takes the same existential condition but comes to different conclusions: slavery
did not define the Black condition because we were Africans first, with world views
and philosophical notions about life, death, possession, community, and so forth that
are rooted in that African heritage. And once we understand how to define ourselves
in terms of this collective identity, Robinson implies, then perhaps we can understand
the persistence of nationalism and various forms of race consciousness (which have
never been fully contained under the limited rubric of "nationalism"). Black Marxism
is less interested in whether or not these collective forms of struggle and consciousness are "essentialist." Instead, Robinson wants to know where they come from and
why they continue. Moreover, he is attempting to discover how these mass movements shaped the thinking and actions of the Black middle strata, the most direct
recipients of Western "civilization."
All this is to say that Gilroy and Robinson are indeed examining the same issues,
but each brings his own brilliant insights and challenging questions to the history of
Europe and the African Diaspora. I am not at all suggesting, then, that one is right
and the other wrong, or that any work that ignores Robinson's interventions ought to
be discounted. My main point, instead, is that an opportunity for conversation has
been missed. The disappearance of such a powerful, provocative book as Black Marxism from the landscape of Black cultural and political studies-not to mention the

FOREWORD

xix

vast literature on the rise of the West, capitalism, imperialism, colonialism, nationalism, transnationalism, Diaspora studies, race, labor, and intellectual history-was a
genuine tragedy.
Thanks to the University of North Carolina Press, this tragedy should prove to be
temporary. Not unlike the music of Thelonious Monk, Black Marxism remains as
fresh and insightful as when it was first composed, still productively engaged with the
central questions posed by histories of the African Diaspora. For example, the book
attempts to address the important matter of how extensively Black people reproduced
an "African" culture in the New World. This age-old question was first raised provocatively by scholars such as Melville Herskovits and Lorenzo Turner,15 but it has
returned with a vengeance in the recent work of Michael Mullin, Gwendolyn Midlo
Hall, Carolyn Fick, Margaret Washington, Michael Gomez, and Joao Reis. These
newer studies, despite their emphasis on documenting and acknowledging African
"ethnic" diversity, reinforce Robinson's thesis that African resistance to New World
slavery was profoundly shaped by the influence of slaves' West and Central African
roots.16 Also, Black Marxism questioned what was then the existing scholarship on
both the Haitian Revolution and Brazil's "Male Uprising" in Bahia, anticipating some
of the arguments proposed by the abovementioned authors. Robinson suggested, for
instance, as Carolyn Fick would later, that historians of Haiti need to pay more
attention to the role of the Maroons. Indeed, Robinson even took C. L. R. James's
Black Jacobins to task for not paying enough attention to the mass uprising.
Yet while Robinson's thesis finds confirmation in much of this new work, the
manner in which he makes his case is bound to draw criticism from scholars resistant
to the idea of "authentic" African culture or cultures. In our current era of extreme
antiessentialism, Robinson's controversial chapter, "The Nature of the Black Radical
Tradition," strikes a discordant note. The idea that all Africans share certain understandings of the world and their place in it, and that these shared understandings
shaped virtually all encounters between Black people and their European masters,
will invariably come across to some readers as a kind of nationalist fiction. But careful
readers will recognize that Robinson's argument is deeply historical and powerfully
supported by evidence. He does not claim that Africans possess some h n d of fixed
essence, for as he points out, the characteristics of the Black Radical Tradition are
more clearly evident in Africans less assimilated into a common New World identity.
Moreover, Robinson is broadly speaking of general ideas and belief systems-ways of
seeing, ways of worshipping. Few bat an eye when confronted with similarly broad
notions such as "Western thought," "Western civilization," and "Western philosophy."
The most important benefit of the return of Black Marxism, however, is not its
confirmation of and challenges to recent scholarship but rather its ability to point
scholars in new directions and encourage them to take up where Robinson left off. He
opened up many roads we have yet to travel, roads that might bring us closer to
understanding and even enacting the real agenda Robinson had in mind: liberation.
How, for instance, have gender and sexuality shaped Black revolt? How do we interpret the fact that Black women were often invested with great spiritual powers, or that
xx

FOREWORD

Black men tended to have more opportunities to travel? Who else deserves a place in
the pantheon of Black radical intellectuals, and who will tell their stories? How does
Robinson's framework challenge the familiar narratives of Black radicalism after
1960?What do we make of radicals who are neither black nor white, militants such as
Harlem's Yuri Kochiyama or Detroit's Grace Lee Boggs or the many South Asians in
England and elsewhere who cast their lot with the Black Radical Tradition? Are there
other avenues besides Marxism that have brought Black radical intellectuals face to
face with the Black Radical Tradition?17
Let us briefly take up the last question. When we consider the lives and works of
Black radical intellectuals such as Aim6 CCsaire, Suzanne Cksaire, Wifredo Lam,
Etienne L&o, Jayne Cortez, Simone and Pierre Yoyotte, Rent! Depestre, Renk Menil,
and even Richard Wright, I think it could be argued that surrealism served as a bridge
between Marxism and the Black Radical Tradition. All of these thinkers were either
active in the surrealist movement or expressed an interest in surrealism. A revolutionary movement whose official origins can be traced to post-World War I Paris, surrealism drew on Marx and Freud while remaining critical of Marxism. What is
surrealism?The Chicago Surrealist group offers one of the most eloquent definitions:
Surrealism is the exaltation of freedom, revolt, imagination and love. . . . [It]
is above all a revolutionary movement. Its basic aim is to lessen and eventually
to completely resolve the contradiction between everyday life and our wildest
dreams. . . . Beginning with the abolition of imaginative slavery, it advances to the
creation of a free society in which everyone will be a poet-a society in which
everyone will be able to develop his or her potentialities fully and freely.I8
Although the surrealist movement was led by European writers and artists such as
AndrC Breton, Paul Eluard, and Benjamin Pkret, one could see in their pronouncements why surrealism would attract the radical Black petit bourgeoisie. Surrealists
explicitly called for the overthrow of bourgeois culture, identified with anticolonial
movements in Africa and Asia, and turned to non-European cultures as a source of
ideas and inspiration in their critique of Western civilization. In 1925 the Paris surrealist group asserted in no uncertain terms, "We profoundly hope that revolutions, wars,
colonial insurrections, will annihilate this Western civilisation whose vermin you
defend even in the Orient." And seven years later, amid economic crisis and the
spread of fascism, the group issued a document titled "Murderous Humanitarianism"
(1932) that consisted of a relentless attack on colonialism, capitalism, the clergy,
hypocritical liberals, and even the Black bourgeoisie. They also declared war: "we
Surrealistes pronounced ourselves in favour of changing the imperialist war, in its
chronic and colonial form, into a civil war. Thus we placed our energies at the
disposal of the revolution, of the proletariat and its struggles, and defined our attitude
towards the colonial problem, and hence towards the colour que~tion."'~
For these Black intellectuals and activists, their dissatisfaction with socialist realism
had to do with the suppression of key elements of Black culture that surrealism
embraced: the unconscious, the spirit, desire, magic, and love. That most Black
FOREWORD

xxi

radicals did not jump headlong onto the surrealist bandwagon, ironically, has to do
with its similarity to the revolutionary core that was recognized as having always
existed in African and Black diasporic life. To paraphrase Cedric Robinson, surrealism was not the path to inventing a theory of Black radicalism, but it might have been
a path to recognition.
The Afro-Chinese Cuban painter Wifredo Lam says he was drawn to surrealism because he already knew the power of the unconscious having grown up in the Africanized spirit world of Santeria. Aim6 Cksaire insists that surrealism merely brought him
back to African culture. In a 1967 interview he explained, "Surrealism provided me
with what I had been confusedly searching for. I have accepted it joyfully because in it I
have found more of a confirmation than a revelation." Surrealism also helped him to
summon up powerful unconscious forces: "This, for me, was a call to Africa. I said to
myself: it's true that superficiallywe are French, we bear the marks of French customs;
we have been branded by Cartesian philosophy, by French rhetoric; but if we break
with all that, if we plumb the depths, then what we will find is fundamentally black."
Likewise, Richard Wright, who began studying surrealist writings in the late i93os,
discussed its impact on his thinking in his unpublished essay titled "Memories of my
Grandmother." Surrealism, he claimed, helped him clarify the "mystery" of his grandmother, and by extension, the character and strengths of African American folk
culture. He gained a new appreciation for the metaphysical as well as for cultural
. ~ ~artist Cheikh Tidiane
forms that do not follow the logic of Western r a t i ~ n a l i t yThe
Sylla is even more explicit about how surrealism reveals what is already familiar in
African culture. "In the ecologicallybalanced tribal cultures of Africa," he writes, "the
surrealist spirit is deeply embedded in social tradition. The 'mysticism' prevalent in all
Black African philosophy presupposes a highly charged psychic world in which every
individual agrees to forget himself or herself in order to concentrate on the least
known instances of the mind's movement-a thoroughly emancipatory experience."
He further asserts that in Africa, the practice of poetry was always a way of life,
whereas in the West, surrealism was the product of a long philosophical and political
struggle "to recover what the traditional African has never lost."21
In many respects, the assertions of Sylla and other Black surrealists resonate powerfully with Robinson's description of the nature of the Black Radical Tradition. For the
Africans whom Robinson identified as the progenitors of this tradition in the New
World, he insists that the focus of their revolt "was [always] on the structures of the
mind. Its epistemology granted supremacy to metaphysics not the material" (169).
One can easily surmise from Black Marxism that surrealism might have been, at least
for some, the missing link that brought Black intellectuals (especially in the Francophone world) face to face with the Black radical tradition. The connection between
surrealism and Black radicalism certainly deserves greater exploration.
Of course, other missing links and roads not taken might shed greater light on the
history and meaning of Black radicalism. It is precisely because Robinson has written
such an ambitious, bold, and provocative book that it is bound to stimulate an endless
array of questions and challenges. And Black Marxism is as politically important and
xxii FOREWORD

relevant now as it was seventeen years ago. The crises faced in the early 1980s have
hardly abated. We enter the new millennium with fewer well-paying jobs, fewer
protections for the rights of oppressed people, poorer health care, more prisons,
more wealth for fewer people, more racist backlash, more misery. In these cases, we
end the twentieth century almost where we ended the last one. Here, in the iggos, socalled legitimate intellectual circles openly proclaim a link between race and intelligence; some, in very serious tones, are proposing the return of formal colonialism as
a way of solving Africa's problems; the United States continues to wage imperialist
wars; and the problem of the color line as Du Bois saw it at the dawn of our century is
still with us.
Yet, amidst crisis and defeat, during the middle and late 1990s we witnessed well
over a million Black men and women, young and old, willing to march on Washington
or through Harlem in the name of atonement, freedom, self-determination, even
revolution. And in June 1998, several thousand of us gathered in Chicago to launch the
Black Radical Congress. The people drawn to these movements are loolung for direction, trying to find their bearings in a world where Black existential suffering is as
much an internal, psychic, spiritual, and ideological crisis as it is a crisis of the material
world. We debate these tensions constantly-structure versus culture, spirituality
versus materiality. They are tensions Cedric Robinson explores in Black Marxism,
which is why the Black radical movement needs this book as much as the academy.
I have no doubt that the return of Black Marxism will have as great an impact on
current and future generations of thinkers as it had on me almost two decades ago. I
am also confident that this time around, it will reach a much larger audience and will
be widely discussed in classrooms, forums, and publications that take both the past
and the future seriously. Why? Because for all of its illuminating insights, bold proclamations, subtle historical correctives, and fascinating detours along paths still unexplored, Black Marxism's entire scaffolding rests on one fundamental question: where
do we go from here? It is the question that produced this remarkable book in the first
place, and it is the question that will bring the next generation to it.
Robin D. G. Kelley

Notes
1. On the construction of "whiteness," see Theodore W. Allen, The Invention of the White Race, vol. 1,
Racist Oppression and Social Control (London: Verso, 1994); David R. Roediger, The Wages of Whiteness
(London: Verso, 1991), and Toward the Abolition of Whiteness: Essays on Race, Politics, and Working Class
History (London: Verso, 1994);Alexander Saxton, The Rise and Fall of the White Republic: Class Politics and
Mass Culture in Nineteenth Century America (London: Verso, 1990); Noel Ignatiev, How the Irish Became
White (New York: Routledge, 1995); Eric Lott, Love and Thefr: Blackface Minstrelsy and the American
Working Class (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993); Matthew Frye Jacobson, Whiteness of a Different
Color: European Immigrants and the Alchemy of Race (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1998).

Two important texts that appeared after Robinson's work and that trace European racialism back at least
to the early Enlightenment are George L. Mosse, Toward the Final Solution: A History of European Racism
(Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1985); and David Theo Goldberg, Racist Culture: Philosophy and
the Politics of Meaning (London: Basil Blackwell, 1993).
2. In addition to discussing Cox in chapter 1 of Black Marxism, Robinson makes a more explicit
FOREWORD

xxlll

connection between his work and Cox's in note 47 of chapter 4, below. Robinson further develops his
analysis of Cox's contribution to a critique of Marxist historiography in his essay, "Oliver Cromwell Cox
and the Historiography of the West," Cultural Critique 17 (Winter 1g9olgl): 5-20; also see Oliver C. Cox,
Capitalism as a System (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1964).
3. See Robinson, 46, below. Henceforth, references to this edition of Black Marxism are cited parenthetically in the text.
4. Martin Bernal, Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots ofClassica1 Civilization, vol. 1, The Fabrication of
Ancient Greece, 1785-1985 (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1987); Mary Lefkowitz, Not Out of
Africa: How Afrocentrism Becamean Excuse to Teach Myth as History (New York: Basic Books, 1996). For the
sources Robinson draws on, see notes 53-129 of chapter 4, below. A recent and insightful intervention on
this question is Wilson Jeremiah Moses, Afrotopia: The Roots of African American Popular History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
5. Edward Said, Orientalism (New York: Pantheon, 1978).
6. Of course, Robinson in no way is saying that these three men are the only ones to have confronted and
eventually embraced the Black Radical Tradition. He is merely offering an opening, locating three figures
whose lives and works clearly embody these ideas. One can extend his analysis to Amilcar Cabral, Frantz
Fanon, Claudia Jones, Aime and Suzanne Cesaire, Wifredo Lam, "Queen Mother" Audley Moore, Martin
Delany, the historian Vincent Harding, musicianlcomposer/playwright Archie Shepp, and many others.
7. Ernest Allen, phone interview by author, April 7, 1996; Huey P. Newton, Revolutionary Suicide (New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1973), 71-72; Donald Warden, "The California Revolt," Liberator3, no. 3
(March 1963): 14-15, Perhaps it is worth noting that one of Robinson's first scholarly publications was a
study of Malcolm X; see Robinson, "Malcolm Little as a Charismatic Leader," Afro-American Studies 3
(1972): 81-96.
8. Harold Cruse, "Revolutionary Nationalism and the Afro-American," in Rebellion or Revolution? (New
York: Morrow, 1968), 74-75; originally published in Studies on the Left 2, no. 3 (1962): 12-25.
9. Robinson, The Terms of Order: Political Science and the Myth ofLeadership (Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1980).
lo. Chinweizu, The West and the Rest of Us: White Predators, Black Slavers, and the African Elite (New
York: Vintage, 1975); Angela Davis, Women, Race, and Class (New York: Random House, 1981); Vincent
Harding, There Is a River: The Black Struggle for Freedom in America (New York: Random House, 1983);V.
P. Franklin, Black Self-Determination: A Cultural History of the Faith of Our Fathers (Westport: Greenwood
Press, 1984);Manning Marable, Blackwater: Historical Studies in Race, Class Consciousness, and Revolution
(Dayton, Ohio: Black Praxis Press, 1981), and How Capitalism Underdeveloped Black America (Boston:
South End Press, 1982); COrnel West, Prophesy Deliverance: An Afro-American Revolutionary Christianity
(Philadelphia: Westminster, 1982).
I am indebted to V. P. Franklin for his insight into the publicity problems that surrounded these
and similar books. He told me an interesting story about his efforts to find a publisher for Black SelfDetermination. He had written Toni Morrison, then editor at Random House and the person most
responsible for their publication of several Black radical books, about possibly sending the manuscript to
her for consideration. Random House had published Chinweizu's The West and the Rest of Us, which
received almost no notice or reviews, so Morrison warned Franklin about the difficulty of publishing Black
radical scholarship. He eventually published with Greenwood Press and, to his disappointment, Black SelfDetermination-like Black Marxism and others-received the same treatment. (Franklin's book has since
been reprinted as Black Self-Determination: A Cultural History of African American Resistance [Brooklyn:
Lawrence Hill Books, 19921.) Aware of this conspiracy of silence, Franklin took it upon himself to promote
this body of radical scholarship; his efforts included a lengthy review of Black Marxism, a shorter version of
which was published in Phylon 47, no. 3 (1986): 250-51. V. P. Franklin, conversation with author, October
24,1998;V. P. Franklin, letter to author, November 2,1998.
11. See, for example, Cornel West, "Black Radicalism and the Marxist Tradition," MonthlyReview40, no.
4 (September 1988): 51-56; and Leonard Harris, "Historical Subjects and Interests: Race, Class, and Conflict:' in The Year Leftz: An American Socialist Yearbook, ed. Mike Davis, Manning Marable, et al. (London:
Verso, 1987),90-105. Most of the reviews were short summaries with a few passing critical remarks. See V.
P. Franklin's review in Phylon 3, no. 3 (1986): 250-51; Charles Herrod, Canadian Review of Studies in
Nationalism 15, nos. 1-2 (1988): 153; Errol1 Lawrence, Race and Class26, no. 2 (Autumn 1984): 100-102.
12. West, "Black Radicalism and the Marxist Tradition," 51.
13. Winston James, Holding Aloft the Banner of Ethiopia: Caribbean Radicalism in Early-Twentieth
Century America (London: Verso, 1998). James sets out to explain the overwhelming presence of West
Indians in Black radical movements and the American Left. His explanation lies in the peculiarities of
Caribbean history and the profiles of the migrants themselves. This early wave of West Indian migrants
were generally "race" men and women with superior education, white collar occupations, protected legal
status as British subjects, experience as international travelers and sojourners, political experience in the
Caribbean, little or no commitment to Christianity, and a tendency for direct confrontation rather than
xxiv

FOREWORD

retreat. For these reasons, James argues, they were predisposed to radicalism. A careful reading of Black
Marxism, however, suggests that many of these characteristics, especially with regard to education and
political experience, can be found among members of the US-born radical Black petit bourgeoisie.
Indeed, building o n the insights of Amilcar Cabral, Robinson had already identified the key role of colonial
education in the formation of a radical Black intelligentsia, but whereas James emphasizes the "love of
reading" as a unique Caribbean cultural characteristic, Robinson suggests a more structural explanation
tied to the imperatives of empire. Colonial rulers, especially in the British and French empires, very
consciously sought to nurture a class of functionaries-a Black petit bourgeoisie willing and able to run
things on behalf of the imperial order. After all, the love of reading was equally intense among US.-born
Black people, as was argued in Du Bois's Black Reconstruction, and more recently, V. P. Franklin's Black SelfDetermination.
More significantly, Robinson's findings call into question James' generalizations that West Indians
adopted a tradition of "frontal assault" on forces of oppression while Blacks in North America adopted
dissimulation, or "wearing the mask." Robinson identifies a tendency on the part of New World Africans to
avoid direct confrontation and the use of violence in the Caribbean and North America; instead, these New
World Africans sought to recreate village life on foreign soil. Indeed, Robinson places great emphasis on
the absence of violence throughout the Diaspora and the critical importance of spiritual and psychic wellbeing. While I do not believe these positions are in direct contradiction, I do think Robinson's insights,
developed almost two decades ago, might have enriched or complicated James's discussion.
Furthermore, while Robinson acknowledges the large numbers of Caribbean radicals in New York
during World War I and the immediate postwar period-the period and place of James's incredibly rich
and detailed study-because Robinson's scope extends globally and across a longer time span, he is able to
locate the impulse toward Black radicalism throughout the Diaspora. Even if we were simply to limit our
scope to the continental United States, once we get out of New York City and explore the South, the
Midwest (especially Oklahoma), and the West Coast, the West Indians are not so prominent in radical
movements.
14. Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1993). Surprisingly, The Black Atlantic only mentions Robinson once to level a criticism
based on what appears to be a misreading of the text. Gilroy disputes Robinson's use of the term "Black
Radical Tradition" because "it can suggest that it is the radical elements of this tradition which are its
dominant characteristics . . . and because the idea of tradition can sound too closed, too final, and too
antithetical to the subaltern experience of modernity which has partially conditioned the development of
these cultural forms" (122). Robinson, however, does not use "radical" as a way of closing off other
characteristics of black life, thought, and struggle-on the contrary, the term is a way of specifying the
source of opposition to slavery, Jim Crow, and various other modes of oppression born of racial capitalism,
colonialism, and imperialism. By "tradition" he is simply signaling the need for a long view, because his
argument rests on his point that the logic of slavery and capitalism does not explain Black opposition, nor
its particular nature; rather, Robinson explains, we need to trace resistance back to who Africans were at
the moment of their incorporation into the world capitalist system. The Black Radical Tradition is not
conceived as a static thing but as a process, one borne not only of African life and thought but also of
European life and thought, one linked directly to premodern forms of European racialism and the
subsequent invention of the Negro.
15. Melville Herskovits, The Myth of the Negro Past (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1941), and The New
World Negro: Selected Papers in Afro-American Studies (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1966);
Leonard Barrett, Soul-Force: African Heritage in Afro-American Religion (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Press,
1974); Roger Bastide, African Civilisations in the New World (London: C. Hurst, 1971), and The African
Religions of Brazil: Toward a Sociology of the Interpretation of Civilisations (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1978); Winifred Vass, The Bantu Speaking Heritage of the United States (Los Angeles:
Center for Afro-American Studies, University of California, 1979); Sidney Mintz and Richard Price, ?'he
Birth of African American Culture: An Anthropological Perspective, zd ed.(Boston: Beacon Press, 1992);
Richard Price, First Time: The Historical Vision of an Afro-American People (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1983).
16. Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, Africans in Colonial Louisiana: The Development ofAfro-Creole Culture in the
Eighteenth Century (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1992); Carolyn Fick, The Making of
Haiti: The Saint-Domingue Revolutionfrom Below (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1990);Michael
Mullin, Africa in America: Slave Acculturation and Resistance in the American South and the British Caribbean, 1736-1831 (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1992); Jolo JosC Reis, Slave Rebellion in Brazil: The
Muslim Uprising of 1835 in Bahia (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1995). See also Robert Farris
Thompson, Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art and Philosophy (New York: Vintage, 1983);
Margaret Washington Creel, 'XPeculiar People": SlaveReligion and Community-Culture among the Gullahs
(New York: New York University Press, 1988); Sandra T. Barnes, ed., Africa2 Ogun: Old World and New
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989); George Brandon, Santeria from Africa to the New World:
FOREWORD

xxv

The Dead Sell Memories (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1993); Joseph Holloway and Winifred
Vass, The African Heritage of American English (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1993); Joseph
Murphy, Santeria: African Spirits in America (Boston: Beacon Press, 1993), and Working the Spirit: Ceremonies of the African Diaspora (Boston: Beacon Press, 1994); Karen Fog Olwig, Cultural Adaptation and
Resistance on St. John: Three Centuries of Afro-Caribbean Life (Gainesville: University of Florida Press,
1985);and Jim Wafer, The Taste ofBlood: Spirit Possession in Brazilian Candomble (Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press, 1991).
Among these newer books, the one that I think shares the deepest affinity with Black Marxism is Sterling
Stuckey's Slave Culture: Nationalist Theory and the Foundations of Black America (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1987), which focuses on the ring shout as a key element in the construction of a black
culture and oppositional ideology. Published just four years after Black Marxism, Slave Culture also
recognizes the African roots of black folk opposition to racial capitalism, demonstrating how the ring
shout's conception of community-as a metaphor and practice-shaped black thinkers as diverse as David
Walker, Henry Highland Garnet, W. E. B. Du Bois, and Paul Robeson.
17. Numerous scholars-Black radical intellectuals, for the most part-have taken up these and other
questions related to themes in Black Marxism. While I do not have the space to cite all of the exciting work
of which I am aware, let me offer just a small sampling. Aside from the texts cited above and below (not to
mention Robinson's own work, which continues to explore Black radical movements, intellectuals, and
culture), see Rod Bush, We Are Not What We Seem: Black Nationalism and Class Struggle I the American
Century (New York: New York University Press, 1999); Hazel Carby, Reconstructing Black Womanhood
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1987), and Race Men (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1998); Angela Y. Davis, Blues Legacies and Black Feminism: Gertrude "Ma" Rainey, Bessie Smith, and Billie
Holiday (New York: Pantheon, 1998); Kevin Gaines, Uplifting the Race: Black Leadership, Politics, and
Culture in the Twentieth Century (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996); Farah Jasmine
Griffin, Who Set You Flowin'?: The African-American Migration Narrative (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1995);Michael Hanchard, Orpheus and Power: The Movimento Negro of Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo,
Brazil, 1945-1988 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994); Gerald Horne, The Fire This Time: The
Watts Uprising and the 1960s (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1995); Tera Hunter, To 'JoyMy
Freedom: Southern Black Women's Lives and Labors after the Civil War (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1997); Lewis Gordon, Her Majesty's Other Children: Sketches of Racism From a Neo-Colonial Age
(Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1997), and Fanon and the Crisis of European Man: An Essay on
Philosophy and the Human Sciences (New York: Routledge, 1995); Joy James, Transcending the Talented
Tenth: Black Leaders and American Intellectuals (New York: Routledge, 1997);Robin D. G. Kelley, Hammer
and Hoe: Alabama Communists during the Great Depression (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1990), and Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class (New York: Free Press, 1994);
George Lipsitz, A L$e in the Struggle: Ivory Perry and the Culture of Opposition (Philadelphia: Temple
University Press, 1988); Brenda Gayle Plummer, Rising Wind: Black Americans and U.S. Foreign Affairs,
1935-1960 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996);Tricia Rose, Black Noise: Rap Music and
Black Culture in Contemporary America (Hanover: Wesleyan University Press, 1994); Timothy B. Tyson,
Radio Free Dixie: Robert Williams and the Roots of Black Power (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1999); Penny von Eschen, Race against Empire (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1997); Komozi
Woodard, A Nation within a Nation (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998); Clyde Woods,
Development Arrested: Race, Power, and the Blues in the Mississippi Delta (London: Verso, 1998); as well as
forthcoming books by Barbara Bair, Elsa Barkley Brown, Nahum Chandler, Cathy Cohen, Gina Dent,
Brent Edwards, Grant Farred, Ruth Wilson Gilmore, Adam Green, Jonathan Holloway, Peniel Joseph,
Chana Kai Lee, Wahneema Lubiano, Tony Monteiro, Jeffery Perry, Vijay Prashad, Barbara Ransby, Nikhil
Singh, Tracye Matthews, Genna Rae McNeil, Tiffany R. L. Patterson, Linda Reed, Ula Taylor, Akinyele
Umoja, and Cynthia Young, to name a few.
18. Quote from "Surrealism and Blues," Living Blues 25 (Jan.-Feb. 1976):19.
19. Franklin Rosemont, ed., Andre Breton: What Is Surrealism?: Selected Writings (New York: Pathfinder,
1978), 37; The Surrealist Group of France, "Murderous Humanitarianism," Race Traitor (Special IssueSurrealism: Revolution against Whiteness) 9 (Summer 1998): 67-69, originally published in Negro: An
Anthology, ed. Nancy Cunard (London: Wishart and Company, 1934); also see Michael Richardson, ed.,
Refusal of the Shadow: Surrealism and the Caribbean (London: Verso, 1996).
20. Max-Pol Fouchet, Wijredo Lam, 2d ed. (Barcelona: Ediciones Polgrafa, S.A., 1989),38,192,196; Aime
Cesaire, Discourse on Colonialism, trans. by Joan Pinkham (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1972), 67;
Eugene E. Miller, Voice of a Native Son: The Poetics of Richard Wright (Jackson: University Press of
Mississippi, iggo), 78-85.
21. Cheikh Tidiane Sylla, "Surrealism and Black African Art," Arsenal: Surrealist Subversion 4 (1989):
128-29.

xxvi FOREWORD

PREFACE T O T H E 2000 E D I T I O N

The workers in the advanced nations have done all they could, or
intended, t o do-which was always something short of revolution.
-Oliver C. Cox, Capitalism as a System

There is much to be admired in those who have struggled under the inspiration of
Marxism. And no recitation of their courage and sacrifice would be adequate or
sufficiently eloquent to capture their awesome achievements-or unhappy failures.
But the same may be said of diverse other social movements over the centuries,
equally inspired by particular constructions of human experience. What such historical spectacles of human endeavor share, of course, is the magnificence of the human
spirit: the inextinguishable resolve to refashion society according to some powerful
but imperfect moral vision.
Myths and theories of liberation have been constants in the long record of human
experience. They are the bracing concomitants to impositions of domination and
oppression, whatever the form of a particular regime. And even when the recorder of
the moment was unsympathetic or downright hostile to even the most fugitive and
muted affirmation of human integrity, there has been almost inevitably at least a
trace-a hint-of the desire for a just order. Solon, Aristophanes, Plato, Isocrates, and
Aristotle, notwithstanding their unrelieved identifications with the propertied classes
of ancient Athens, all could not entirely conceal or effectively dismiss the moral
challenges of the poor (demos), slaves, and women.' Among these writers were some
of the most clever weavers of aristocratic flummery. So it is not surprising that if the
moral authority spawned in the quest for freedom confounded their gifts for eloquent argument, the same would be repeated over the next two thousand years in the
works of their seemingly inexhaustible line of heirs. The medieval inquisition, with
its vast clerical intelligentsia and uncontested access to lethal force, never achieved
the extinction of the urban Waldensian, Franciscan, and Cathar rebellions against
poverty, or the largely rural communisms which bubbled up from among the peasants and the Church's own convents and m~nasteries.~
And half a millennium later,
though the sheer volume of three centuries of legislation, literature, and state force in

support of slavery in Africa and the New World might have appeared daunting,
history proves otherwise-the liberationist agenda of antislavery t r i ~ m p h e d . ~
These three examples from ancient Athens, medieval Europe, and the modern New
World are merely instances, moments, in the extraordinary historical index of liberation. Presently one might surmise that more attention is being given to liberation's
record than at any previous moment in Western historiography. At least in part, this
is a legacy of Marxism. The more substantial inspiration, however, is the present state
of the world. For the vast majority of the planet's peoples, the global economy
publicizes itself in human misery. Thus, the simple fact is that liberationist movements abound in the real world-a reason for attention far more weighty than the
self-serving conceits of capitalist triumphalism and the incessant chants of globalism
which followed upon the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
As Foucault recounted, neither Marx nor Engels were particularly audacious when
they characterized the capitalist mode of production as voraciously exploitative. As far
back as the eighteenth century, David Ricardo, Adam Smith, and numerous other
nonradical predecessors in the emerging field of political economy had expressed
.~
economic observations of industrial capitalism
similar doubts and u n e a ~ eHegel's
were even more immediate to the studies conducted by Engels and Marx. In the late
eighteenth century, with uncharacteristic brevity and specificity, Hegel recorded:
"Complete mercilessness. Factories, manufacturing, base their subsistence on the
What was stunning in the writings ofMarx and Engels, then, was
misery of one cla~s."~
not their mere recognition of class struggle but rather their sympathies in that struggle. While Kant and Hegel threw their support to the bureaucrats as that stratum
which constituted what Hegel designated as the "universal class," Marx and Engels
proposed the industrial proletariat, wage laborers. But quite possibly that was less an
error in judgment (as Cox supposed) than a deceit: even in their own times, notwithstanding their different historical contexts and their specific political maneuvers, it
should have been obvious that Kant, Hegel, Marx, and Engels all concealed their faith
in philosophy. As Marx put it in 1844: "The weapon of criticism cannot, of course, supplant the criticism of weapons; material force must be overthrown by material force.
But theory, too, will become material force as soon as it seizes the ma~ses."~
Given the
miserable social and political chaos of their era (and of our own), we should have little
difficulty in sympathizing with the impulse to seek political refuge-that is, a social
agenda-in the illusory order and power of pure logic and ~peculation.~
The "masses" whom Marx presumed would be "seized" by theory were European
male wage laborers and artisans in the metropoles ofwestern Europe, Britain, and the
United States. Here both theory and Marx's casting of historical materialism betrayed
him. Instead of the anarchic globalism of modern capitalist production and exchange, Marx imagined a coherent ordering of things: congruous imperial sites from
which cohorts of capitalists cultivated, directed, and dominated satellite societies. For
Marx, capitalism consisted of a geometric whole whose elementary and often hidden characteristics (price, value, accumulation, and profit) could be discovered with
arithmetic means and certainty.
xxviii P R E F A C E T O THE 2 0 0 0 E D I T I O N

Driven, however, by the need to achieve the scientific elegance and interpretive
economy demanded by theory, Marx consigned race, gender, culture, and history to
the dustbin. Fully aware of the constant place women and children held in the
workforce, Marx still deemed them so unimportant as a proportion of wage labor
that he tossed them, with slave labor and peasants, into the imagined abyss signified
And how, can we supby precapitalist, noncapitalist, and primitive acc~mulation.~
pose, was Marx's conception of the mode-specific, internal development of European
productive forces to accommodate the technological borrowings from China, India,
Africa, and the Americas which propelled the West into industrialism and imperialism?' As Andre Gunder Frank declares:
the original sin of Marx, Weber, and their followers was to look for the "origin,"
"cause," "nature," "mechanism," indeed the "essence" of it [capitalism, development, modernization] all essentially in European exceptionalism instead of in the
real world econornylsy~tem.~~
Marx's conceit was to presume that the theory of historical materialism explained
history; but, at worst, it merely rearranged history. And at its best (for it must be
acknowledged that there are some precious insights in Marxism), historical materialism still only encapsulated an analytical procedure which resonated with bourgeois
Europe, merely one fraction of the world economy.
Eurocentrism and secular messianism, however, were not the only ideological
elements which worked to constrict Marx's imaginary. There was an obvious genealogy and a striking parallel between Aristotle's treatments of slaves and slavery and
those of Marx. Aristotle saw slavery as necessary for the self-sufficiency of the polis,
and in only rare instances were slaves expected to achieve a virtuous life. Given their
marginal intelligence and development, Aristotle found no compelling reason for
inquiry into the ethics, consciousness, or desires of slaves, content to state that "the
slave is in a sense a part of his master, a living but separate part of his body."" Marx,
though he found slavery abhorrent, similarly recessed slaves from his discourse on
human freedom: "The slave only works swayed by fear, and it is not his existence itself
which is at stake, since it is guaranteed to him even if it does not belong to him."12
Their role in capitalist production, Marx believed, was an embarrassing residue of a
precapitalist, ancient mode of production, which disqualified them from historical
and political agency in the modern world. And this is not the only evidence that Marx
had been substantially influenced by Aristotle. As much as on his own immediate
predecessors (Kant, Hegel, etc.), Marx also had drawn on Aristotle for his notions of
class and class conflict, the latter most frequently signified by ancient Greek writers as
stasis. Moreover, in Capital, Marx had acknowledged the genius of Aristotle, whose
discussion of use-value and exchange-value in the Politics had predated by one and
three-quarters millenia any economic system which Marx was willing to acknowledge
as capitalist.13
How and by what Marx and Engels were seduced into these misapprehensions is
explored in Part I of the following study. But of equal and perhaps greater interest are
PREFACE TO THE 2000 E D I T I O N

XXlX

the efforts of renegade radical thinkers to determine what those seductions were and
how to recouperate radical theory from its blunders. These particular critics of Marxism were products of other histories, other intellectual traditions, and other, neglected participants in the world economy. When I took up this work, I was interested
specifically in those radical thinkers who had emerged from what I have termed the
Black Radical Tradition; how some of the most illustrious and perceptive of them
came to terms with Marxism is explored in Part 111. Rather than belonging to the
mercantile, bureaucratic, or technical classes of Western Europe, their foreparents
had been the slaves and freedpersons of the West Indies and North America. More
accurately, their predecessors had been human beings who happened to be slaves.
And so in Part 11, in lieu of simply locating these foreparents in some passive, residual
economic category, it was critical to explore the histories of their cultures and then
how these enslaved people responded to and reacted against the violence which
instigated and patrolled their slave statuses. Only through such an interrogation was it
possible to demonstrate their roles in the initiation of the Black Radical Tradition.
Ironically, to Black radicals of the twentieth century, one of the most compelling
features of Marxism was its apparent universalism. Unlike the dominant historical
discourses of the nineteenth century, historical materialism was inflected by an internationalism and a scientific rigor which plainly transcended the obnoxious and sinister claims for destiny exhibited by such conceits as German nationalism, British
imperialism, the racism of the "White Man's Burden," and so forth. For a time, then,
Marxism might have seemed an effective antidote to contemporary discourse. But
Marxism's internationalism was not global; its materialism was exposed as an insufficient explanator of cultural and social forces; and its economic determinism too often
politically compromised freedom struggles beyond or outside of the metropole. For
Black radicals, historically and immediately linked to social bases predominantly
made up of peasants and farmers in the West Indies, or sharecroppers and peons in
North America, or forced laborers on colonial plantations in Africa, Marxism appeared distracted from the cruelest and most characteristic manifestations of the
world economy. This exposed the inadequacies of Marxism as an apprehension of the
modern world, but equally troubling was Marxism's neglect and miscomprehension
of the nature and genesis of liberation struggles which already had occurred and
surely had yet to appear among these peoples.
The Black Radical Tradition was an accretion, over generations, of collective intelligence gathered from struggle. In the daily encounters and petty resistances to domination, slaves had acquired a sense of the calculus of oppression as well as its overt
organization and instrumentation. These experiences lent themselves to a means of
preparation for more epic resistance movements. The first organized revolts in the
slave castles in Africa, and on board slave ships, were generally communal in the
terms of their Old World kinships (Bambara, Ganga, Yoruba, etc.). These rebellions
sought return to African homelands and a repair of the discontinuity produced by
enslavement and transportation. Later, in the colonial settlements, when conditions
were favorable, revolts often took the form of marronage, a concession to the rexxx

PREFACE TO THE 2 0 0 0 E D I T I O N

location of slavery and to the new, syncretic cultural identities emergent from the
social cauldron of slave organization. Newly transported "outlaw" Africans and creole
Blacks, and sometimes Native Americans and European slaves, withdrew beyond the
patrolled presence of exploitation to forge egalitarian societies.
With each historical moment, however, the rationale and cultural mechanisms of
domination became more transparent. Race was its epistemology, its ordering principle, its organizing structure, its moral authority, its economy of justice, commerce,
and power. Aristotle, one of the most original aristocratic apologists, had provided
the template in Natural Law. In inferiorizing women ("[TI he deliberative faculty of
the soul is not present at all in the slave; in a female it is present but ineffective"
[Politics,i26oaiz]),non-Greeks, and all laborers (slaves, artisans, farmers, wage workers, etc.: "[Tlhe mass of mankind are evidently quite slavish in their tastes, preferring
a life suitable to beasts" [Nicomachean Ethics, 1095b20]),Aristotle had articulated an
uncompromising racial construct. And from the twelfth century on, one European
ruling order after another, one cohort of clerical or secular propagandists following
another, reiterated and embellished this racial calculus.14As the Black Radical Tradition was distilled from the racial antagonisms which were arrayed along a continuum
from the casual insult to the most ruthless and lethal rules of law; from the objectifications of entries in marine cargo manifests, auction accountancy, plantation
records, broadsheets and newspapers; from the loftiness of Christian pulpits and
biblical exegesis to the minutia of slave-naming, dress, types of food, and a legion of
other significations, the terrible culture of race was revealed. Inevitably, the tradition
was transformed into a radical force. And in its most militant manifestation, no
longer accustomed to the resolution that flight and withdrawal were sufficient, the
purpose of the struggles informed by the tradition became the overthrow of the
whole race-based structure.
In the studies of these struggles, and often through engagement with them, the
Black Radical Tradition began to emerge and overtake Marxism in the work of these
Black radicals. W. E. B. Du Bois, in the midst of the antilynching movement, C. L. R.
James, in the vortex of anticolonialism, and Richard Wright, the sharecropper's son,
all brought forth aspects of the militant tradition which had informed successive
generations of Black freedom fighters. These predecessors were Africans by origins,
predominantly recruited from the same cultural matrices, subjected to similar and
interrelated systems of servitude and oppression, and mobilized by identical impulses
to recover their dignity. And over the centuries, the liberation projects of these men
and women in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Americas acquired similar emergent
collective forms in rebellion and marronage, similar ethical and moral articulations
of resistance; increasingly, they merged as a function of what Hegel might have
recognized as the negation of the negation in the world system. Hegel's "cunning of
history," for one instance, was evident when in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, Franco-Haitian slaveowners fled to Louisiana, Virginia, and the
Carolinas with as many slaves as they could transport, thereby also transporting the
Haitian Revolution. The outrage, courage, and vision of that revolution helped inPREFACE T O THE 2 0 0 0 EDITION

XXXi

spire the Pointe Coupee Conspiracy in 1795 in Louisiana, the Gabriel-led rebellion in
1800 in Virginia, and the rebellion organized by Denmark Vesey in 1822 outside of
Charle~ton.'~
And, in turn, Denmark's movement informed the revolutionary tract,
APPEAL in Four Articles; Together with a Preamble, to the Coloured Citizens of the
World, But in Particular, and Very Expressly, to Those of the United States of America,
penned by David Walker in Boston in 1829.
Du Bois drew on Hegelian dialectics and Marx's notions of class struggle to correct
the interpretations of the American Civil War and its subsequent Reconstruction
period grown dominant in American historiography (for instance, Woodrow Wilson's A History of the American People [1908])and popular culture (Thomas Dixon's
and D. W. Griffith's Birth of a Nation [1915]).16Undaunted by the fact that he was
already on forbidden terrain in the thinking of Hegel, Marx, and his own American
contemporaries, Du Bois ventured further, uncovering the tradition. Almost simultaneously, James discovered the tradition in the Haitian Revolution. And only a little
later, Wright contributed his own critique of proletarian politics from the vantage
point of the Black Radical Tradition. For Du Bois, James, and Wright, Marxism
became a staging area for their immersion into the tradition. Black Marxism was not
a site of contestation between Marxism and the tradition, nor a revision. It was a new
vision centered on a theory of the cultural corruption of race. And thus the reach and
cross-fertilization of the tradition became evident in the anticolonial and revolutionary struggles of Africa, the Caribbean, and the Americas.
As a culture of liberation, the tradition crossed the familiar bounds of social and
historical narrative. Just as in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, to take one
instance, African marronage infected Native American and African settlements in
Florida to produce the Black Seminoles who fought against the United States for three
decades, the tradition has effused in myriad forms and locations. For some sense ofthe
diversity, one might examine how the tradition insinuated itself quite unexpectedly
into the writings of Harriet Beecher Stowe when she authored A Key to Uncle Tom's
Cabin (1853),and particularly Dred, a Tale of the Great Dismal Swamp (1856);into the
Blacks who volunteered during the Civil War, and those in the American military who
sent letters of outrage from the Philippines during the Spanish-American War; into
Pentecostalism in the early twentieth century; into the blues composed by Rainey and
all the women named Smith; and into the filmic work of Oscar Micheaux during the
silent film era. Reviewing this list, I suspect the Black Radical Tradition extends into
cultural and political terrains far beyond my competence to relate.
In short, as a scholar it was never my purpose to exhaust the subject, only to suggest
that it was there.

Notes
I. See my forthcoming study of the history of Western socialism, The Anthropology ofMarxism (Hanover,
N.H.: University Press of New England); and Cynthia Farrar, The Origins of Democratic Thinking (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1988).

xxxii PREFACE TO THE 2000 EDITION

2. See R. I. Moore, The Formation of a Persecuting Society: Power and Deviance in Western Europe, 9501250 (New York: Blackwell, 1987); and the classic work of Norman Cohn, Pursuit of the Millennium (New

York: Oxford University Press, 1961).
3. See my Black Movements in America (New York: Routledge, 1997).
4. Michel Foucault, The Order of Things (London: Tavistock Publications, 1970),255%.
5. Leo Rauch, ed., Hegel and the Human Spirit (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1983), 166.
6. Karl Marx, "Towards a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right: Introduction." In Karl Marx: Selected
Writings, ed. David McLellan (New York: Oxford University Press, i977), 69.
7. Sheldon Wolin, The Politics and Vision (Boston: Little, Brown, 1960).
8. See Marx's rather perfunctory comments on women and children in Capital, where he suggests they
constitute part of the reserve army employed episodically to retard the falling rate of profit, and compare
with the implications of his research into parliamentary investigations of child labor which describe a
more constant exploitation of child laborers. Earlier, in The German Ideology (1844), Marx had implied
that the control over female reproduction in tribal society had inaugurated the first division of labor in
human history.
9. Andre Gunder Frank, Reorient: Global Economy in the Asian Age (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1998). Frank comments: "[Joseph] Needham lists not only the well-known Chinese inventions of
gunpowder, paper and printing, and the compass. He also examines co-fusion and oxygenation iron and
steel technology, mechanical clocks, and engineering devices such as drive-belts and chain-drive methods
of converting rotary to rectilinear motion, segmental arch and iron-chain suspension bridges, deepdrilling equipment; and paddle-wheel boats, foresails and aft sails, watertight compartments and sternpost
rudders in navigation, and many others" (193). He goes on to state that "Indian mathematics and astronomy were sufficiently advanced for Europeans to import astronomical tables and related works from India
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In medicine, the theory and practice of inoculation against
smallpox came from India." Frank then continues with a survey of more recent studies of "[tlhe export of
lndian science and technology relating to shipbuilding, textiles, and metallurgy" (194).
lo. Ibid., 336.
11. Aristotle, Politics, 1255bi2.
12. See Marx's "sixth" chapter of Capital, in Karl Marx: Selected Writings, 512.
13. On Marx's debt to Aristotle, see chapters 1and z of G. E. M. de Ste. Croix, The Class Struggle in the
Ancient Greek World (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981);and Scott Meikle, Aristotle's Economic Thought
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1995).
14. For some recent Aristotelians, see Thomas K. Lindsay, "Was Aristotle Racist, Sexist, and AntiDemocratic?," The Review of Politics 56 (Winter 1994): 127-51; Peter Garnsay, Ideas of Slavery from Aristotle
to Augustine (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996),which traces the influence of Aristotle into the
first 400 years of Christianity; and Sir Moses Finley, Ancient Slavery and Modern Ideology (London:
Penguin, 1986), which traces Aristotle into the modern age.
15. Robinson, Black Movements in America, 32-36.
16. See Robinson, "In the Year 1915: D. W. Griffith and the Whitening of America:' Social Identities 3
(June1997): 161-92.

PREFACE TO THE 2000 E D I T I O N

XXXlii

PREFACE

It is always necessary to know what a book is about, not just what has been written in
it but what was intended when it was written.
This work is about our people's struggle, the historical Black struggle. It takes as a
first premise that for a people to survive in struggle it must be on its own terms: the
collective wisdom which is a synthesis of culture and the experience of that struggle.
The shared past is precious, not for itself, but because it is the basis of consciousness,
of knowing, of being. It cannot be traded in exchange for expedient alliances or
traduced by convenient abstractions or dogma. It contains philosophy, theories of
history, and social prescriptions native to it. It is a construct possessing its own terms,
exacting its own truths. I have attempted here to demonstrate its authority. More
particularly, I have investigated the failed efforts to render the historical being of Black
peoples into a construct of historical materialism, to signify our existence as merely
an opposition to capitalist organization. We are that (because we must be) but much
more. For the younger brothers and sisters, and for those who identify with the Black
struggle who are tempted by the transubstantiation of Black history to European
radical theory, this book is a challenge. I humbly submit this work to you-and to
the others with whom the project had its beginnings: Mary Agnes Lewis, Margot
Dashiell, Frederick Douglas Lewis, Welton Smith, Sherman Williams, Nebby-Lou
Crawford, Jim Lacy, Gopalan Shyamala, Jay Wright, J. Herman Blake, Don Hopkins,
Henry Ramsey, Donald Warden. . . and the others I met along the way.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was begun while I was teaching in Binghamton, New York. By the time it
was finished, my family and I had moved to the Santa Barbara region of California. In
between we had spent a year in the small English village of Radwinter, south of
Cambridge. In sum this covered a period of almost six years. During this time
support for the research and writing was extended to me by the SUNY-Binghamton
Foundation, the University of California at Santa Barbara, and the National Research
Council and Ford Foundation program of Post-Doctoral Fellowships for Minorities.
Such support was important. But even more important was that extended by the
staff at the Center for Black Studies at uc-Santa Barbara, headed by Alyce Whitted, its
administrative assistant and heart. They constituted a second family within which it
was possible to work on matters of seriousness and purpose. In England, this support
was augmented by my friends at the Institute of Race Relations, A. Sivanandan, Jenny
Bourne, Colin Prescod, Hazel Walters, Paul Gilroy, Lou Kushnick, Danny Reilly,
Harsh Punja, and Tony Bunyan. I am also deeply indebted to my editors at Zed Press,
Robert Molteno and Anna Gourlay. To them is owed any coherence which might exist
in the work that follows.
Among the number of scholars to whom an intellectual acknowledgement is owed,
I must distinguish St. Clair Drake. Both his patience and example are reflected in the
body of the work. He carries his knowledge with wisdom and grace.
The last word is reserved for my family: Elizabeth, who read the first writings and
suggested their worth; and Najda, who will some day, I hope, share that opinion. Six
of her first eight years are at stake. I expect she will, if for no other reason than the
authority of her mother, who read every line of this manuscript (and suggested
some). To the two of them I extend my deepest appreciation.

INTRODUCTION

This study attempts to map the historical and intellectual contours of the encounter
of Marxism and Black radicalism, two programs for revolutionary change. I have
undertaken this effort in the belief that in its way each represents a significant and
immanent mode of social resolution, but that each is a particular and critically
different realization of a history. The point is that they may be so distinct as to be
incommensurable. At issue here is whether this is so. If it is, judgments must be made,
choices taken.
The inquiry required that both Marxism and Black radicalism be subjected to
interrogations of unusual form: the first, Marxism, because few of its adherents have
striven hard enough to recognize its profound but ambiguous indebtedness to Western civilization; the second, Black radicalism, because the very circumstance of its
appearance has required that it be misinterpreted and diminished. I have hoped to
contribute to the correction of these errors by challenging in both instances the
displacement of history by aeriform theory and self-serving legend. Whether I have
succeeded is for the reader to judge. But first it may prove useful to outline the
construction of the study.
In Western societies for the better part of the past two centuries, the active and intellectual opposition of the Left to class rule has been vitalized by the vision of a socialist
order: an arrangement of human relations grounded on the shared responsibility and
authority over the means of social production and reproduction. The variations on
the vision have been many, but over the years of struggle the hardiest tradition has
proven to be that identified with the work and writings of Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels,
and V. I. Lenin. Obviously here the term "tradition" is used rather loosely since the
divergencies of opinion and deed between Marx, Engels, and Lenin have been demonstrated by history to be as significant as their correspondence. Nevertheless, in common as well as in academic parlance, these three activist-intellectuals are taken to be
the principal figures of Marxist or Marxist-Leninist socialism. Marxism was founded
on the study of the capitalist expropriation and exploitation of labor as first taken up
by Engels, then elaborated by Marx's "material theory of history," his recognition of
the evolving systems of capitalist production and the inevitability of class struggle, and
later augmented by Lenin's conceptions of imperialism, the state, the "dictatorship of
the proletariat," and the role of the revolutionary party. It has provided the ideological,
historical, and political vocabulary for much of the radical and revolutionary presence

emergent in modern Western societies. Elsewhere, in lands economically parasitized
by the capitalist world system, or in those rare instances where its penetration has been
quarantined by competing historical formations, some sorts of Marxism have again
translated a concern with fundamental social change.
However, it is still fair to say that at base, that is at its epistemological substratum,
Marxism is a Western construction-a conceptualization of human affairs and historical development that is emergent from the historical experiences of European
peoples mediated, in turn, through their civilization, their social orders, and their
cultures. Certainly its philosophical origins are indisputably Western. But the same
must be said of its analytical presumptions, its historical perspectives, its points of
view. This most natural consequence though has assumed a rather ominous significance since European Marxists have presumed more frequently than not that their
project is identical with world-historical development. Confounded it would seem by
the cultural zeal that accompanies ascendant civilizations, they have mistaken for
universal verities the structures and social dynamics retrieved from their own distant
and more immediate pasts. Even more significantly, the deepest structures of "historical materialism," the foreknowledge for its comprehension of historical movement, have tended to relieve European Marxists from the obligation of investigating
the profound effects of culture and historical experience on their science. The ordering ideas that have persisted in Western civilization (and Marx himself as we shall see
was driven to admit such phenomena), reappearing in successive "stages" of its
development to dominate arenas of social ideology, have little or no theoretical justification in Marxism for their existence. One such recurring idea is racialism: the
legitimation and corroboration of social organization as natural by reference to the
"racial" components of its elements. Though hardly unique to European peoples, its
appearance and codification, during the feudal period, into Western conceptions of
society was to have important and enduring consequences.
In the first part of this study, I have devoted three chapters to explicating the
appearance and formulation of racial sensibility in Western civilization and its social
and ideological consequences. Chapter 1 reconstructs the history of the emergence of
racial order in feudal Europe and delineates its subsequent impact on the organization of labor under capitalism. Racism, I maintain, was not simply a convention for
ordering the relations of European to non-European peoples but has its genesis in the
"internal" relations of European peoples. As part of the inventory of Western civilization it would reverberate within and without, transferring its toll from the past to the
present. In contradistinction to Marx's and Engels's expectations that bourgeois society would rationalize social relations and demystify social consciousness, the obverse occurred. The development, organization, and expansion of capitalist society
pursued essentially racial directions, so too did social ideology. As a material force,
then, it could be expected that racialism would inevitably permeate the social structures emergent from capitalism. I have used the term "racial capitalism" to refer to
this development and to the subsequent structure as a historical agency. The second
chapter, as it rehearses the formation of the working classes in England, looks pre2

INTRODUCTION

cisely at this phenomenon. Since the English working classes were the social basis for
Engels's conceptualization of the modern proletariat, and conjoined with the sansculotte of the French Revolution to occupy a similar place in Marx's thought, their
evolving political and ideological character is of signal importance in reckoning the
objective basis for Marxist theory. Of particular interest is the extent to which racialism (and subsequently nationalism) both as ideology and actuality affected the class
consciousness of workers in England. In the intensely racial social order of England's
industrializing era, the phenomenology of the relations of production bred no objective basis for the extrication of the universality of class from the particularisms of
race. Working-class discourse and politics remained marked by the architectonic
possibilities previously embedded in the culture.
But the appearance of European socialism and its development into a tradition
was, as well, somewhat at odds with socialism's subsequent historiography and orthodoxies. The third chapter pursues among the middle classes the obscured origins of
socialism and the contradictions that weakened its political and ideological expressions. It was indeed nationalism, a second "bourgeois" accretion, that most subverted
the socialist creation. Nationalism, as a mix of racial sensibility and the economic
interests of the national bourgeoisies, was as powerful an ideological impulse as any
spawned from these strata. As an acquired temper and as a historical force met on the
fields of social and political revolution, nationalism bemused the founders of historical materialism and those who followed them. It was to overtake both the direction of
capitalist development and eventually the formative structures of socialist societies as
they appeared in the present century. The historical trajectories of those developments, again, were almost entirely unexpected in a theoretical universe from which it
had been discerned that ideology and false consciousness were supposedly being
expelled. When in its time Black radicalism became manifest within Western society
as well as at the other junctures between European and African peoples, one might
correctly expect that Western radicalism was no more receptive to it than were the
apologists of power.
Part I1 takes up this other radical tradition, Black radicalism, the conditions of its
historical emergence, its forms, and its nature. This exposition begins in chapter 4
with the reinvestigation of the past relations between Europeans and Africans, a past
that has been transformed by Europeans and for Europeans into a grotesque parody, a
series of legends as monstrously proportioned as Pliny's Blemmyae "whose heads 1 Do
grow beneath their shoulders." The obscuring of the Black radical tradition is seated
in the West's suppression of Europe's previous knowledge of the African (and its own)
past. The denial of history to African peoples took time-several hundreds of yearsbeginning with the emergence of Western Europeans from the shadow of Muslim
domination and paternalism. It was also a process that was to transport the image of
Africa across separate planes of dehumanization latticed by the emerging modalities
of Western culture. In England, at first gripped by a combative and often hysterical
Christianity-complements of the crusades, the "reconquests," and the rise of Italian
capitalism-medieval English devouts recorded dreams in which the devil appeared
INTRODUCTION

3

as "a blacke moore," "an Ethiope." This was part of the grammar of the church, the
almost singular repository of knowledge in Europe. Centuries later the Satanic gave
way to the representation of Africans as a different sort of beast: dumb, animal labor,
the benighted recipient of the benefits of slavery. Thus the "Negro" was conceived.
The Negro-whose precedents could be found in the racial fabrications concealing
the Slavs (the slaves), the Irish and others-substantially eradicated in Western historical consciousness the necessity of remembering the significance of Nubia for Egypt's
formation, of Egypt in the development of Greek civilization, of Africa for imperial
Rome, and more pointedly of Islam's influence on Europe's economic, political, and
intellectual history. From such a creature not even the suspicion of tradition needed
to be entertained. In its stead there was the Black slave, a consequence masqueraded as
an anthropology and a history.
The creation of the Negro was obviously at the cost of immense expenditures of
psychic and intellectual energies in the West. The exercise was obligatory. It was an
effort commensurate with the importance Black labor power possessed for the world
economy sculpted and dominated by the ruling and mercantile classes of Western
Europe. As chapter 5 indicates, the Atlantic slave trade and the slavery of the New
World were integral to the modern world economy. Their relationship to capitalism
was historical and organic rather than adventitious or synthetic. The Italian financiers
and merchants whose capital subsidized Iberian exploration of the Atlantic and
Indian oceans were also masters of (largely "European") slave colonies in the Mediterranean. Certainly slave labor was one of their bases for what Marx termed "primitive
accumulation." But it would be an error to arrest the relationship there, assigning
slave labor to some "pre-capitalist" stage of history. For more than 300 years slave
labor persisted beyond the beginnings of modern capitalism, complementing wage
labor, peonage, serfdom, and other methods of labor coercion. Ultimately, this meant
that the interpretation of history in terms of the dialectic of capitalist class struggles
would prove inadequate, a mistake ordained by the preoccupation of Marxism with
the industrial and manufacturing centers of capitalism; a mistake founded on the
presumptions that Europe itself had produced, that the motive and material forces
that generated the capitalist system were to be wholly located in what was a fictive
historical entity. From its very foundations capitalism had never been-any more
than Europe-a "closed system."
Necessarily then, Marx's and Engels's theory of revolution was insufficient in scope:
the European proletariat and its social allies did not constitute the revolutionary
subject of history, nor was working-class consciousness necessarily the negation of
bourgeois culture. Out of what was in reality a rather more complex capitalist world
system (and one to which Marx in his last decade paid closer attention), other
revolutionary forces emerged as well. Informed as they were by the ideas and cultures
drawn from their own historical experiences, these movements assumed forms only
vaguely anticipated in the radical traditions of the West. In the terms of capitalist
society they were its negation, but that was hardly the source of their being. And
among them was the persistent and continuously evolving resistance of African peo4

INTRODUCTION

ples to oppression. The sixth chapter rehearses the history of this Black radical
tradition in the African diaspora and to some extent in the African continent itself. As
both this and the seventh chapter attempt to demonstrate, the record of resistance for
four centuries or more, from Nueva Espana to Nyasaland, leaves in no doubt the
specifically African character of those struggles. Resistances were formed through the
meanings that Africans brought to the New World as their cultural possession; meanings sufficiently distinct from the foundations of Western ideas as to be remarked
upon over and over by the European witnesses of their manifestations; meanings
enduring and powerful enough to survive slavery to become the basis of an opposition to it. With Western society as a condition, that tradition almost naturally assumed a theoretical aspect as well.
The third and final section of this study traces the social and intellectual backgrounds of the processes that led to the theoretical articulation of Black radicalism.
The conditions for modern Black theory were present first in the African diaspora.
Far from Africa and physically enveloped by hostile communities, Black opposition
acquired a penetrative comprehension. But it was a social and political as well as a
historical process that nurtured theory. In the pursuit of that process I have identified
three seminal Black radical intellectuals: William Edward Burkhardt Du Bois, Cyril
Lionel Robert James, and Richard Nathaniel Wright. They have been chosen for
detailed treatment not only because they made substantial contributions to the theoretical text, but because their lives and circumstances were prisms of the events
impending on and emanating from the Black radical tradition. Their reactions to
their confrontation with Black resistance, the very means used for their expression
were distinct but related, characterized by circumstance, temperament, and training.
Though their lives were very dissimilar-only Wright could be said to have been
directly produced by the Black peasant and working classes-they all came to that
tradition late (and hesitantly, as I will argue with respect to Du Bois and James). For
all three, though, Marxism had been the prior commitment, the first encompassing
and conscious experience of organized opposition to racism, exploitation, and domination. As Marxists, their apprenticeships proved to be significant but ultimately
unsatisfactory. In time, events and experience drew them toward Black radicalism
and the discovery of a collective Black resistance inspired by an enduring cultural
complex of historical apprehension. In these concluding chapters I have attempted to
demonstrate how and why this was so. Taken together, the efforts of Du Bois, James,
and Wright consisted of a first step toward the creation of an intellectual legacy that
would complement the historical force of Black struggle. Their destiny, I suggest, was
not to create the idea of that struggle so much as to articulate it. Regardless, the Black
opposition to domination has continued to acquire new forms. In a very real sense
then, the present study follows.

INTRODUCTION

5

presumption of a determinant economic rationality in the development and expansion of capitalism, has been characterized by an incapacity to come to terms with the
world system's direction of developments. Marxism, the dominant form that the
critique of capitalism has assumed in Western thought, incorporated theoretical and
ideological weaknesses that stemmed from the same social forces that provided the
bases of capitalist formation.
The creation of capitalism was much more than a matter of the displacement of
feudal modes and relations of production by capitalist ones.2 Certainly, the transformation of the economic structures of noncapitalist Europe (specifically the Mediterranean and western European market, trade, and production systems) into capitalist
forms of production and exchange was a major part of this process. Still, the first
appearance of capitalism in the fifteenth century3 involved other dynamics as well.
The social, cultural, political, and ideological complexes of European feudalisms
contributed more to capitalism than the social "fettersm4that precipitated the bourgeoisie into social and political revolutions. No class was its own creation. Indeed,
capitalism was less a catastrophic revolution (negation) of feudalist social orders than
the extension of these social relations into the larger tapestry of the modern world's
political and economic relations. Historically, the civilization evolving in the western
extremities of the AsianIEuropean continent, and whose first signification is medi,~
with few disjunctions from feudalism as the dominant mode of
eval E ~ r o p epassed
production to capitalism as the dominant mode of production. And from its very
beginnings, this European civilization, containing racial, tribal, linguistic, and regional particularities, was constructed on antagonistic differences.
Europe's Formation

The social basis of European civilization was "among those whom the Romans called
the 'barbarians.' "6 Prior to the eleventh or twelfth centuries, the use of the collective
sense of the term "barbarian" was primarily a function of exclusion rather than a
reflection of any significant consolidation among those peoples. The term signified
that the "barbarians" had their historical origins beyond the civilizing reach of Roman law and the old Roman imperial social order. The "Europe" of the ninth century
for which the Carolingian family and its minions claimed paternity was rather limited
geopolitically7and had a rather short and unhappy existence. Interestingly, for several
centuries following the deaths of Charlemagne and his immediate heirs (the last being
Arnulf, d.899), both the Emperor and Europe were more the stuff of popular legend
and clerical rhetoric than manifestations of social reality.8 The idea of Europe, no
longer a realistic project, was transferred from one of a terrestrial social order to that
of a spiritual kingdom: Christendom.
In fact, those peoples to whom the Greeks and the Romans referred collectively as
barbarians were of diverse races with widely differing c ~ l t u r e sThe
. ~ diversity of their
languages is, perhaps, one measure of their differences. But in using this measure, we

10

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

must be cautious of the schemes of classification of those languages that reduce the
reality of their numbers to simple groupings like the Celtic, the Italic, the Germanic,
the Balto-Slavonic, and Albanian languages.I0
Direct and indirect evidence indicates that a more authentic mapping of the
languages of the proto-Europeans would be much more complex. For instance,
H. Munro Chadwick, as late as 1945, could locate extant descendants of those several languages among the Gaelic, Welsh, and Breton languages of Great Britain and
France; the Portuguese, Spanish, Catalan, Provenqal, French, Italian, Sardinian, Alpine, and Rumanian languages and dialects of southern and western Europe; the
English, Frisian, Dutch, German, Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, and Icelandic languages of England, Scotland the Netherlands, Germany, and Scandinavia;the Russian,
Bulgarian, Yugoslavian, Slovenian, Slovakian, Czech, Polish, and Lusitian languages
and dialects of central and eastern Europe; and the Latvian and Lithuanian languages
of northern Europe.ll But even Chadwick's list was ofmerely those languages that had
survived "the millennium of Europe." The list would lengthen considerably if one
were to consider the languages which existed in this area at the beginning of this era
and are no longer spoken (for example, Latin, Cornish, and Prusai), along with those
languages of peoples who preceded the migrations from the north and east of Rome's
barbarians (for example, Basque, Etruscan, Oscan, and Umbrian).I2
The Ostrogoth, Visigoth, Vandal, Suevi, Burgundi, Alamanni, and Frank peoplesthat is the barbarians-whose impact on the fortunes ofthe Late Roman Empire from
the fifth century was quick and dramatic,13were in fact a small minority of thousands
among the millions of the decaying state. Henri Pirenne, relying on the estimates of
Emile-Felix Gautier and L. Schmidt, reports that the Ostrogoths and Visigoths may
have numbered ioo,ooo each, the Vandals 80,000, and the Burgundi 25,000.14 Moreover, the warrior strata of each kingdom are consistently estimated at about 20
percent of their populations. On the other hand, the Empire that they invaded
contained as many as 50-70 million persons.15Pirenne cautiously concludes:
All this is conjecture. Our estimate would doubtless be in excess of the truth if, for
the Western provinces beyond the limes, we reckoned the Germanic element as
constituting 5 percent of the population.16
More importantly, the vast majority of the barbarians "came not as conquerors,
but exactly as, in our own day, North Africans, Italians, Poles cross into Metropolitan
France to look for work."I7 In a relatively short time, in the southern-most European
lands that were bounded by the Western Roman Empire, these peoples were entirely
assimilated by the indigenous peoples as a primarily slave labor force.18 The pattern
was already a familiar one within the dying civilization of the Mediterranean19with
which they desired and desperately needed to join.20It is also important to realize that
with respect to the emerging European civilization whose beginnings coincide with
the arrivals of these same barbarians, slave labor as a critical basis of production
would continue without any significant interruption into the twentieth century.21

RACIAL CAPITALISM

II

From the familia rustica that characterized Roman and even earlier Greek (dodos)
rural production within vast estates, through the manucipia of the colonicae and
mansi land-holdings of Merovingian (481-752) and Carolingian eras, the feudal villains of western medieval Europe and England, and the sclavi of the Genoese and
Venetian merchants who dominated commercial trade in the Mediterranean from the
thirteenth to the sixteenth century, slave labor persisted as an aspect of European
agrarian production up to the modern era.22Neither feudal serfdom, nor capitalism
had as their result the elimination or curtailment of slavery.23At the very most (it is
argued by some), their organization served to relocate it.24
Despite the "Romanization" of the southern Goths, or seen differently because of
it, the Germanic tribes did establish the general administrative boundaries that were
to mark the nations of modern western Europe. The kingdoms that they established,
mainly under the rules of Roman hospitalitas and in accordance with Roman admini s t r a t i ~ nwere
, ~ ~ in large measure the predecessors of France, Germany, Spain, and
Italy.
Still, we must not forget that in historical reconstruction, a medieval age is to be
intervened between these two ages. Medieval Europe, though still agricultural in
economy, was a much cruder existence for slave, peasant, farmer, artisan, land-owner,
cleric, and nobility alike than had been the circumstance for their predecessors in the
Empire. Urban life declined, leaving the old cities in ruins,26long-distance trade,
especially by sea routes, decayed dramati~ally.~~
Latouche summarizes:
The balance-sheet of the Merovingian economy is singularly disappointing. The
now fashionable, if unpleasant, word "rot" describes it to perfection. Whether in
the sphere of town life, commerce, barter, currency, public works, shipping, we
find everywhere the same policy of neglect, the same selfish refusal to initiate
reform. From this disastrous, drifting laissez-faire which left men and things as
they had always been, pursuing unchanged their traditional way of life, there
sprang the illusion that the ancient world still lingered on; it was, in fact, no more
than a facade.28
The Carolingian Empire did little to repair the "rot" that anticipated the restructuring of Europe in feudal terms. The Muslim conquests of the Mediterranean in the
seventh and eighth centuries had deprived the European economies of the urban,
commercial, productive, and cultural vitality they required for their reconstruction.
Pirenne put it boldly:
The ports and the cities were deserted. The link with the Orient was severed, and
there was no communication with the Saracen coasts. There was nothing but
death. The Carolingian Empire presented the most striking contrast with the Byzantine. It was purely an inland power, for it had no outlets. The Mediterranean
territories, formerly the most active portions of the Empire, which supported the
life of the whole, were now the poorest, the most desolate, the most constantly

I2 E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S O F E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

menaced. For the first time in history the axis of Occidental civilization was displaced toward the North, and for many centuries it remained between the Seine
and the Rhine. And the Germanic peoples, which had hitherto played only the
negative part of destroyers, were now called upon to play a positive part in the
reconstruction of European c i ~ i l i z a t i o n . ~ ~
Latouche, though he differed with Pirenne on many of the particulars of the
Carolingian response to the loss of the Mediterranean, finally concurred:
[Tlhe Empire broke up less than half a century after its creation, and Charlemagne
did nothing to prevent, and did not even attempt to delay, the development of
feudal institutions, so heavy with menace for the future . . . a world in which there
were no great business concerns, no industries, and in which agricultural activity
was p r e d ~ m i n a n t . ~ ~
Urban life, trade, and market systems incorporating the goods of long-distance
trade did not return to Europe until the end ofthe eleventh century at the earliest, and
most probably during the twelfth century.31By then, the depth to which the degradation of European life had fallen is perhaps best expressed by the appearance of
commercialized c a n n i b a l i ~ m . ~ ~
The First Bourgeoisie

Into this depressed land where few were free of the authority of an intellectually
backward and commercially unimaginative ruling class, where famine and epidemics
were the natural order of things, and where the sciences of the Ancient World had
long been displaced as the basis of intellectual development by theological fables and
d e m ~ n o l o g y appeared
,~~
the figure to which European social theorists, Liberal and
Marxist, attribute the generation of Western civilization: the bourgeoisie. The merchant was as alien to feudal society as the barbarian invaders had been to the Empire.
Unlike the Mediterranean tradesmen,34 the origins of the western European bourgeoisie are obscured. No doubt this is largely due to the fact that historical documentation is inevitably sparse where civilization in the formal sense of urban culture has
largely disappeared, and where life is recorded by an elite of land and church largely
preoccupied with its own experience while hostile to commerce.35Nevertheless, it is
clear that the western European merchant class-"a class of dera~ines"~~-crystallized
within a social order for which it was an extrinsic phenomena.
The economic organization of demesne production was characterized by Pirenne
as a "closed domestic economy one which we might call, with more exactitude, the
economy of no markets."37In fact, there were markets, local ones, but their function
and existence had no part in the development of the markets of long-distance trades
that were the basis of the merchant class's development. The mercati, whose existence
predates the bourgeoisie, dealt not in trade but foodstuffs at the retail
The one

RACIAL CAPITALISM

13

factor "internal" to the feudal order that did contribute to the rise of the bourgeoisie
was the eleventh century's population growth. This increase had ultimately placed
significant strains on feudal production:
It had as a result the detaching from the land an increasingly important number of
individuals and committing them to that roving and hazardous existence which, in
every agricultural civilization, is the lot of those who no longer find themselves
with their roots in the soil. It multiplied the crowd of vagabonds. . . . Energetic
characters, tempered by the experience of a life full of the unexpected, must have
abounded among them. Many knew foreign languages and were conversant with
the customs and needs of diverse lands. Let a lucky chance present itself. . . they
were remarkably well equipped to profit thereby. . . . Famines were multiplied
throughout Europe, sometimes in one province and sometimes in another, by that
inadequate system of communications, and increased still more the opportunities,
for those who knew how to make use of them, of getting rich. A few timely sacks of
wheat, transported to the right spot, sufficed for the realizing of huge profits. . . . It
was certainly not long before nouveaux riches made their appearance in the midst
of this miserable crowd of impoverished, bare-foot wanderers in the world.39
In the beginning, before they could properly be described as bourgeoisie, these
merchants traveled from region to region, their survival a matter of their mobility
and their ability to capitalize on the frequent ruptures and breakdowns of the reproduction of populations sunk into the manorial soil. Their mobility may have also
been occasioned by the fact that many of them were not free-born and thus sought
respite from their social condition by flight from their lords: "By virtue of the wandering existence they led, they were everywhere regarded as foreigner^."^^ For security
they often traveled in small bands-a habit that would continue into their more
sedentary period. It was not long before they began to establish porti (storehouses or
transfer points for merchandise) outside the burgs (the fortresses of the Germanic
nobles) bishoprics and towns that straddled the main routes of war, communications,
and later, international trade. It was these porti, or merchant colonies, that founded,
in the main, the medieval cities of Europe's hinterland. It was at this point that the
merchants of Europe became bourgeoisies (burgenses). By the beginnings of the
twelfth century, these bourgeoisies had already begun the transformation of European life so necessary for the emergence of capitalism as the dominant organization
of European production.
The western European bourgeoisie re-established the urban centers by basing them
upon exchange between the Mediterranean, the East, and northern Europe:
[In the tenth century] there appears in Anglo-Saxon texts the word "port:' employed as a synonym for the Latin words urbs and civitas, and even at the present
day the term "ports" is commonly met with in the names of cities of every land of
English speech.
Nothing shows more clearly the close connection that existed between the eco14

EMERGENCE A N D L I M I T A T I O N S O F E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

nomic revival of the Middle Ages and the beginnings of city life. They were so
intimately related that the same word which designated a commercial settlement
served in one of the great idioms of Europe to designate the town itself.41
Elsewhere, Pirenne puts it more succinctly: "Europe 'colonized' herself, thanks to
the increase of her inhabitant^."^^ Flanders-geographically situated to service the
commerce of the northern seas, and economically critical because of the Flemish
cloth industry-was the first of the major European merchant centers. Close behind Flanders came Bruges, Ghent, Ypres, Lille, Douai, Arras, Tournai, Cambrai,
Valenciennes, Liege, Huy, Dinant, Cologne, Mainz, Rouen, Bordeaux, and B a y ~ n n e . ~ ~
Cloth, which both Pirenne44and Karl P01anyi~~
identify as the basis of European
trade, originally a rural industry, was transformed by the bourgeoisie in Flanders into
an urban manufacture "organized on the capitalistic basis of wage labour."46The
urban concentration of industry was thus initiated:
The increase of the population naturally favored industrial concentration. Numbers of the poor poured into the towns where cloth-malung, the activity of which
trade grew proportionately with the development of commerce, guaranteed them
their daily bread. . . .
The old rural industry very quickly disappeared. It could not compete with that
of the town, abundantly supplied with the raw material of commerce, operating at
lower prices, and enjoying more advanced methods. . . .
[Wlhatever might be the nature of industry in other respects, everywhere it
obeyed that law of concentration which was operative at such an early date in
Flanders. Everywhere the city groups, thanks to commerce, drew rural industry to
them.47
It is also true that the bourgeoisie, in so doing, came to free some portions of the
serfs4*only to re-enslave them through wage labor. For with urban industry came the
successful attack on feudal and seigniorial servitude:
Freedom, of old, used to be the monopoly of a privileged class. By means of the
cities it again took its place in society as a natural attribute of the citizen. Hereafter
it was enough to reside on city soil to acquire it. Every serf who had lived for a year
and a day within the city limits had it by definite right: the statute of limitations
abolished all rights which his lord exercised over his person and chattels. Birth
meant little. Whatever might be the mark with which it had stigmatized the infant
in his cradle, it vanished in the atmosphere of the city.49
With the flourishing of long-distance trade and the development of urban centers in
western Europe came some specializations in rural production. Though open-field
agriculture dominated Europe as a whole in the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth
centuries, specialized grain production could be found in Prussia (corn), Tuscany and
Lombardy (cereals), England (wheat), and north Germany (rye). By the late fifteenth
century, viticulture had appeared in Italy, Spain, France, and southwest Germany. In
R A C I A L CAPITALISM

Id

the Baltic and North Seas, fishing and salt made up a significant part of the cargoes of
Hanseatic shippers. And in England and Spain, meat production for export had
begun to emerge.50
In northern Europe, these exports joined wool and woolen cloth as the major bases
of international trade. In southern Europe-more precisely the Mediterranean-the
long-distance trade in cloth (wool, silk, and later cotton), grains, and wines came to
complement a significant trade in luxury goods:
The precious stuffs from the east found their way into every rich household, and so
did the specialities of various European regions: amber and furs from the countries
bordering on the Baltic; objets d'art such as paintings from Flanders, embroidery
from England, enamels from Limoges; manuscript books for church, boudoir or
library; fine armor and weapons from Milan and glass from Venice.51
Still, according to Iris Origo, the most precious cargo of the Mediterranean tradesmen was slaves:
European and Levantine traders sold Grecian wines and Ligurian figs, and the
linen and woolen stuffs of Champagne and Lombardy, and purchased precious
silks from China, carpets from Bokhara and Samarkand, furs from the Ural Mountains, and Indian spices, as well as the produce of the rich black fields and forests of
the Crimea. But the most flourishing trade of all was that in slaves-for Caffa was
the chief slave-market of the Levant.s2
Tartar, Greek, Armenian, Russian, Bulgarian, Turkish, Circassian, Slavonic, Cretan,
Arab, African (Mori), and occasionally Chinese (Cathay) slavess3-two-thirds of
whom were female54-were to be found in the households of wealthy and "even
relatively modest Catalan and Italian families."55
From the thirteenth century to the beginnings of the fifteenth century, the primary
function of these predominantly European slaves in the economics of southern Europe was domestic service.56Nevertheless, in Spain (Catalan and Castile) and in the
Italian colonies on Cyprus, Crete, and in Asia Minor (Phocaea) and Palestine, Genoese and Venetian masters used both European and African slaves in agriculture on
sugar plantations, in industry, and for work in mines:
This variety of uses to which slaves were put illustrates clearly the degree to which
medieval colonial slavery served as a model for Atlantic colonial slavery. Slave manpower had been employed in the Italian colonies in the Mediterranean for all the
kinds of work it would be burdened with in the Atlantic colonies. The only important change was that the white victims of slavery were replaced by a much greater
number of African Negroes, captured in raids or bought by traders.57
In an unexpected way, this trade in slaves would prove to be the salvation of the
Mediterranean bourgeoisie. In the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries, however, it appeared that the merchants of the European hinterland would inevitably
overshadow those of Italy's city-states. They, unlike the Italians, were undeterred, as
16

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

Giuliano Procacci points out, by the peninsula's small but densely packed populations; the increasingly unfavorable ratios of townsmen to countrymen (Florence
could only survive on the produce of its countryside for five months of the year,
Venice and Genoa had to be almost entirely supplied by sea); and the rapid deforestation of the countryside that aggravated the destruction of the autumn and
spring floods.58
However, it was the fate of this nascent bourgeoisie not to thrive. Indeed, for one
historical moment, even the further development of capitalism might be said to have
been in question. The events of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries intervened in
the processes through which feudalism was ultimately displaced by the several forms
. ~ ~ consequence of those events were to determine the species of
of ~ a p i t a l i s m The
the modern world: the identities of the bourgeoisies that transformed capitalism
into a world system; the sequences of this development; the relative vitalities of
the several European economies; and the sources of labor from which each economy
would draw.
The momentous events of which we speak were: the periodic famines that struck
Europe in this period, the Black Death of the mid-fourteenth century and subsequent
years, the Hundred Years War (1337-1453), and the rebellions of peasants and art i s a n ~Together
.~~
they had a devastating impact on western Europe and the Mediterranean-decimating the populations of cities and countryside alike, disrupting trade,
collapsing industry and agricultural production-leveling, as it were, the bulk of
the most developed regions of western European bourgeois activity. Denys Hay has
summed it up quite well:
The result of prolonged scarcity, endemic and pandemic plague, the intermittent
but catastrophic invasions of ruthless armies, and the constant threat in many areas
from well-organized robber bands, was seen not only in a dwindling population
but in roads abandoned to brambles and briars, in arable land out of cultivation
and in deserted villages. Contraction in the area of cultivation in its turn made
dearth the more likely. There was in every sense a vicious circle. A sober estimate
suggests that "in 1470 the number of households was halved in most European
villages compared with the start of the fourteenth century"; the reconquest of
forest and waste of the arable is "an episode equal in importance to the drama of
the earlier lear rings.''^^
This general economic decline in Europe of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
was marked in a final and visible way by social disorders much more profound than
the territorial wars. Such wars, after all had been in character with feudal society. The
appearance of peasant movements was not:
In the boom condition of the thirteenth century there had been in rural areas a
degree of over-population which made many peasants-day labourers, poor serfsvery vulnerable. Now the countryside was more sparsely occupied and a better
living was possible for those who remained. . . . What was new in the slump
RACIAL CAPITALISM

17

conditions of the fourteenth century was a bitterness in the lord's relations with
the villagers.62
As Hay indicates, the most intense of the peasant rebellions occurred in Flanders
(1325-z8), northern France (the Jacquerie of q58), and England (1381). But such
movements erupted over much of western Europe during the fourteenth, fifteenth,
and sixteenth centuries. In France, and especially Normandy (precipitated surely by
the final savaging of the peasants by the forces of the Hundred Years War), in Catalonia (1409-13 and later), in Jutland (1411), in Finland (1438), and in Germany (iy4),
peasants arose, seizing land, executing lords, clergy, and even lawyers, demanding an
end to manorial dues, petitioning for the establishment of wage-labor, and insisting
on the dissolution of restrictions on free buying and selling.63
Within the vortex of these disturbances, long-distance trade declined drastically. In
England, the export of wool and cloth, and subsequently their production, fell well
below thirteenth-century levels.64In France (Gascony), the export of wine was similarly affe~ted.~;
Hay remarks that "Florentine bankruptcies in the first half of the
fourteenth century are paralleled by similar troubles in Florence at the end of the fifteenth centuryY6'jwhile P. Ramsey notes the precipitous fall of "the great merchant
bankers of southern germ an^."^^ Further north, the Hansa League di~integrated:~
while to the west, the Flemish cloth industry ~ o l l a p s e dFinally,
. ~ ~ even the northern
Italian city-states found their bourgeoisie in decline. The rise of the Ottoman Empire,
at first disruptive to the Italian merchant houses, would dictate new accommodations
to Islam and commerce, eventually persuading some ofthe Italians to relocate as capitalist colonists in the Iberian peninsula.70For the moment, however, the foundations
of the European civilization, still figuratively embryonic, appeared to be crumbling.
The Modern World Bourgeoisie

Henri Pirenne, however, provided a key to one of the mysteries of the emergence of
the modern era in the sixteenth century from the chaos and desperation of the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries: the "survival" of the bourgeoisie. Pirenne also
anticipated the somewhat rhetorical question put by K. G. Davies in the heat of the
debate revolving around the historical authenticity of the phrase: the rise of the
middle class. Davies queried:
What, after all, is wrong with the suggestion that the bourgeoisie, not steadily but by
fits and starts, improved its status over many centuries, a process that began with
the appearance of towns and has not yet been finally c o n s ~ m r n a t e d ? ~ ~
Forty years earlier, Pirenne had already replied:
I believe that, for each period into which our economic history may be divided,
there is a distinct and separate class of capitalists. In other words, the group of
capitalists of a given epoch does not spring from the capitalist group of the preceding epoch. At every change in economic organization we find a breach of con18 E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

tinuity. It is as if the capitalists who have up to then been active recognize that they
are incapable of adapting themselves to conditions which are evoked by needs
hitherto unknown and which call for methods hitherto ~ n e m p l o y e d . ~ ~
Both Pirenne and Davies understood that the biological metaphor of a bourgeoisie
emerging out of the Middle Ages, nurturing itself on the "mercantilisms" and administrations of the Absolute Monarchies of the traditional period between feudalism
and the capitalism, and on the lands and titles of impoverished nobilities, then finally
achieving political and economic maturity and thus constituting industrial capitalism, is largely unsupported by historical evidence. Rather it is a historical impression,
a phantom representation largely constructed from the late eighteenth century to the
present by the notional activity of a bourgeoisie as a dominant class. This history of
"the rise of the middle class" is an amalgam of bourgeois political and economic
power, the self-serving ideology of the bourgeoisie as the ruling class and thus an
intellectual and political preoccupation-mediated through the constructs of evolutionary theory:
From Darwin has descended the language of error, a language that has locked up
historical thinking and imposed slovenly and imprecise conclusions even upon
scholarly and sensible researchers. Words like "growth," "decline," "development,"
"evolution," "decay," may have started as servants but they have ended as masters:
they have brought us to the edge of historical ine~itability.~~
Hegel's dialectic of Aufhebung, Marx's dialectic of class struggle and the contradictions between the mode and relations of production, Darwin's evolution of the
species and Spencer's survival of the fittest are all forged from the same metaphysical
conventions. The declining European bourgeoisies of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries were not, for the most part, the lineal antecedents of those that appeared in
the sixteenth century. The universality of capitalism is less a historical reality than a
construct of this "language of error."74These "distant and separate class[es]of capitalists" were less the representatives of an immanent, rational, commercial order than
extensions of particular historical dynamics and cultures. They were not the "germ"
of a new order dialectically posited in an increasingly confining host-feudalism-but
an opportunistic strata, willfully adaptive to the new conditions and possibilities
offered by the times. Not only did different western European bourgeoisies appear in
the sixteenth century, but these new bourgeoisie were implicated in structures, institutions, and organizations that were substantively undeveloped in the Middle Ages.
For one, the focus of long-distance trade in Europe gravitated from the Mediterranean and Scania areas to the Atlantic. The most familiar forms of this extension of
trade to the south and west of the European peninsula were merchant voyages and
colonization. Second, "expanded bureaucratic state structure^"^^ became the major
conduits of capitalist expansion: determining the direction of investment, establishing political security for such investments, encouraging certain commercial networks
and relations while discouraging others:
R A C I A L CAPITALISM

19

In these conditions, in fact, may be seen the matrix of modern capitalism: like
nationalism, less the creator than the creation of the modern state. It had many
antecedents, but its full emergence required a conjunction of political and moral as
well as strictly economic factors. This emergence could take place within the intricate framework of one type of western state then evolving; it may be doubted
whether it could have done so under any other circumstances that we know of in
history; at any rate it never did.76
The city, the point of departure for the earlier bourgeoisies and their networks of
long-distance trade and productive organization, proved to be incapable of sustaining
the economic recovery of those bourgeoisies situated where the merchant town had
reached its highest development: northern Italy, western Germany, the Netherlands,
and the Baltic.77The Absolutist State, under the hegemony of western European
aristocracies, brought forth a new bourgeoisie. The territories of Castile (Spain), the
Ile de France, the Home Counties and London (England), the expansionist and
colonial ambitions and policies of their administrations, and the structures of their
political economies organized for repression and exploitation, these constituted the
basis of this bourgeois' formation.
The bourgeoisies of the sixteenth century accumulated in the interstices of the
state. And as the state acquired the machinery of rule-bureaucracies of administrative, regulatory, and extractive concerns, and armies of wars of colonial pacification,
international competition, and domestic repres~ion~~-those
who would soon constitute a class, settled into the proliferating roles of political, economic, and juridical
agents for the state. And as the state necessarily expanded its fiscal and economic
activitie~,~"new merchant and banking class parasitized its host: State loans, state
monopolies, state business became the vital centers of its construction.
So while the territorial states and empires acquired lands in plenty, they were
unable to exploit unaided the resultant huge economic units. This incapacity again
opened the door to the towns and the merchants. It was they, who, behind the
facade of subordination were making their fortunes. And even where the states
could most easily become masters, in their own territory with their own subjects,
they were often obliged to make shifts and compromise^.^^
It is still debatable whether this was a result of what Adam Smith and Eli Heckscher
after him termed the "system" of r n e r ~ a n t i l i s r n or
, ~ ~the consequence of what other
historians describe as the ideology of statisma2 Nevertheless, it is clear that by the
seventeenth century, the new bourgeoisies were identified with political attitudes and
a trend in economic thought that was pure mercantilism:
IIJmplicit in the "tragedy of mercantilism" was the belief that what was one man's
or country's gain was another's loss. . . . It was, after all, a world in which population remained remarkably static; in which trade and production usually grew only
very gradually; in which the limits of the known world were expanded slowly and
with great difficulty; in which economic horizons were narrowly limited; and in
20

EMERGENCE A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

which man approximated more closely than today to Hobbes' vision of his natural
state: for most men most of the time, life was "poor, nasty, brutish and short."x3
The parochialism of the town, which had so much characterized the perspective of
the bourgeoisie of the Middle Ages, was matched in this second era of Western
civilization by a parochialism of the state. Heckscher commented that:
The collective entity to [peoples ofthe sixteenth and seventeenth centuries] was not
a nation unified by common race, speech, and customs: the only decisive factor for
them was the state. . . . Mercantilism was the exponent of the prevailing conception
of the relationship between the state and nation in the period before the advent of
romanticism. It was the state and not the nation which absorbed its a t t e n t i ~ n . ~ ~
Again, the particularistic character of the formations of these bourgeoisie^^^ withheld, from what would be called capitalism, a systemic structure. The class that is so
consistently identified with the appearance of industrial capitalism was inextricably
associated with specific "rational" structures-a relationship that profoundly influ, ~ ~is national
enced bourgeois imaginations and realizations. Political e c o n ~ m i e sthat
economies, enclosed them, and thus the bourgeoisie perceived what later analysis
argues in retrospect is the beginnings of a world system as something quite different:
an international system.87The bourgeoisies of early modern capitalism were attempting to destroy or dominate each other.
The Lower Orders

Just as the western European middle classes were suspended in webs of state parochialisms, so too was that vast majority of European peoples: the lower orders. The class
that ruled, the nobility, by its orchestration of the instrumentalities of the state,
imprinted its character on the whole of European society. And since much of that
character had to do with vi0lence,8~the lower orders were woven into the tapestry of a
violent social order. By the nature of hierarchical societies, the integration of the
lower classes-wage laborers, peasants, serfs, slaves, vagabonds, and beggars-into the
social, political, and economic orders of the Absolute State was on the terms of the
clients of the latter. The function of the laboring classes was to provide the state and
its privileged classes with the material and human resources needed for their maintenance and further accumulations of power and wealth. This was not, however, a
simple question of the dominance of a ruling class over the masses.
The masses did not exist as such. As earlier, Greek and Roman thinkers had created
the totalizing construct of the barbarians, the feudal nobilities of western Europe had
inspired and authored a similar myth. Friedrich Hertz has reported that:
In the Middle Ages and later, the nobility, as a rule, considered themselves of better
blood than the common people, whom they utterly despised. The peasants were
supposed to be descended from Ham, who, for lack of filial piety, was known to
have been condemned by Noah to slavery. The knightly classes of many lands, on
R A C I A L CAPITALISM

21

the other hand, believed themselves to be the descendants of the Trojan heroes,
who after the fall of Troy were said to have settled in England, France and Germany.
This theory was seriously maintained not only in numerous songs and tales of
knightly deeds, but also in many scholarly works.89
It was a form of this notion that Count Gobineau revived in the mid-nineteenth
century, extending its conceptualization of superiority so as to include elements of the
bo~rgeoisie.~~
The nobilities of the sixteenth century, however, proved to be more
circumspect about "the masses" than their genealogical legends might imply. They
did not become victims of their own mythic creations. When it came to the structures
of the state, their knowledge of the social, cultural, and historical compositions of the
masses was exquisitely refined. Perhaps this is no more clearly demonstrated than in
one of the most critical areas of state activity: the monopolization of force.
The Absolutist State was a cause and effect of war. Its economy was a war economy,
, ~ bureaucracy
~
administered the preparations and
its foreign trade was c ~ m b a t i v eits
prosecutions of war.92Such a state required standing armies (and, eventually, navies).
But for certainly political and sometimes ecdnomic reasons, soldiers could not be
recruited easily from, in V. G. Kiernan's phrase, "the mass of ordinary peasants and
burghers." Kiernan puts the situation most simply for France, though it was the same
all over Europe: "Frenchmen were seldom eager to serve their king, and their king was
Loyalty to the state of the monarchy from the
not eager to employ Fren~hmen."~~
exploited ranks of the lower classes was rare. In any case, not one state of the sixteenth
or seventeenth century was reliant on such an identification between the masses and
their rulers. The soldiers of the armies of France, Spain, England, Holland, Prussia,
Poland, Sweden, and at first Russia, were either alien to the states for which they
fought and policed or very marginal to them:
European governments . . . relied very largely on foreign mercenaries. One of the
employments for which they were particularly well suited was the suppression of
rebellious subjects, and in the sixteenth century, that age of endemic revolution,
they were often called upon for this purpose. . . . Governments . . . had to look
either to backward areas for honest, simple-minded fellows untainted by political
ideas . . . or to foreigner^.^^
Depending then on changing fortunes, the "identities" of the combatants, the geopolitics of wars, and the mission, mercenaries were drawn from among the Swiss, the
Scots, Picardians, Bretons, Flemings, Welsh, Basques, Mavarrese, Gallowayians, Dalmatians, Corsicans, Burgundians, Gueldrians, the Irish, Czechs, Croatians, Magyars,
and from Gascony, Allgaeu, Norway, and Albania. Since one function and result of
the work of these mercenaries was the suppression of subject peoples, the degree of
their success is directly indicated by their own absence, for the most part, from the
political geography of modern Europe. The Absolute State (or its direct successors),
the instrument that propelled them into prominence in the sixteenth and seventeenth

22 E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S O F E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

centuries (for France, into the late eighteenth century), ultimately absorbed the
autonomous sectors from which the mercenaries originated.
In the armies of the sixteenth century, native recruits distributed among the foreign mercenaries were also chosen with an eye to minimizing the political and social
risks of the monarchy and its allied nobility. In France, the army "drew its volunteers
from the least 'national,' most nondescript types, the dregs of the poorest classes,"
Kiernan informs
In Spain, the hills of Aragon and the Basque provinces served
a similar function. In Britain, until the mid-eighteenth century, the Scottish Highlands were the most frequent sites of recruitment; and the Welsh soldier's skills
became legendary.96
Important as the formation of these armies was for the construction of the states
that dominated Europe for more than zoo years, we must not be diverted from their
more historical importance by the romantic richness of the social and political drama
to which they contributed. Louis XI'S innovation in 1474, of organizing a "French infantry without Fren~hmen"~'
was revolutionary in scale, not in c h a r a ~ t e rThe
. ~ ~tactic
of composing armies from mercenaries and from marginal peoples and social strata
extended back into the Middle Ages and earlier. Imperial armies, republican armies,
bandit armies, invading armies and defending armies, the armies of rebellious slaves,
of nobles, and even of the chauvinist medieval cities, all laid claim to, or incorporated
to some extent, souls for whom they had at best few considerations in less intense
times.99More significantly, in reviewing this phenomenon for the sixteenth and later
centuries, the point is not that mercenaries were recruited from the outside and from
among those least secure internally; this is simply the best documented form of a
more generalized pattern of structural formation and social integration.
The important meaning is that this form of enlisting human reserves was not
peculiar to military apparatus but extended throughout Europe to domestic service,
handicrafts, industrial labor, the ship- and dock-workers of merchant capitalism, and
the field laborers of agrarian capitalism. There has never been a moment in modern
European history (ifbefore) that migratory and/or immigrant labor was not a significant aspect of European economies.100That this is not more widely understood seems
to be a consequence of conceptualization and analysis: the mistaken use of the nation
as a social, historical, and economic category; a resultant and persistent reference to
national labor "pools" (e.g., "the English working class"); and a subsequent failure of
historical investigation. Wallerstein, in his otherwise quite detailed study of the origins of the capitalist world system, can devote a mere page to this phenomenon,
including a single paragraph on the ethnic divisions of sixteenth-century immigrant
labor. And though compelled to acknowledge that "not much research seems to have
been done on the ethnic distribution of the urban working class of early modern
Europe," he goes on to speculate that Kazimiery Tymimecki's description of systematic ethnic distinctions of rank within the working class "in the towns of sixteenthcentury East Elba . . . [is] typical of the whole of the world economy."101Despite the
paucity of studies there are historical records that tend to confirm this view. We

R A C I A L CAPITALISM

23

discover in them Flemish cloth workers in early sixteenth-century London; and later
in the sixteenth and in the seventeenth century, Huguenot refugees (40,000-80,000
of them), many of them handloom weavers, fleeing France and settling in Spitalfields
in London's East End and thus, establishing England's silk industry.lo2In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Irish workers "formed the core ofthe floating armies
of labourers who built canals, the docks, the railways and transformed the face of
England."lo3And again on the European Continent, as German farm workers and
peasants were drawn to urban and industrial sectors of central and western Germany,
Polish labor was used to fill the vacuum in eastern Germany.ln4France and Switzerland also recruited heavily from Poland, Italy, and Spain.lo5And, of course, the
formation of industrial cores in the United States before the Civil War located immigrant workers from northern Italy, Germany, Scotland, and Ireland; and after the
Civil War from southern Italy, and the lands of eastern, northern, and central Europe:
Russia, Finland, Poland, Greece, and the Balkans.lo6(Perhaps the only unique aspect
of north American industrial recruitment was the appearance of Asian workers beginning in the late nineteenth century, from China, Japan, and the Philippines.)'07
We begin to perceive that the nation is not a unit of analysis for the social history of
Europe. The state is a bureaucratic structure, and the nation for which it administers
is more a convenient construct than the historical, racial, cultural, and linguistic
entity that the term "nation" signifies.lo8The truer character of European history
resides beneath the phenomenology of nation and state. With respect to the construction of modern capitalism, one must not forget the particular identities, the
particular social movements and societal structures that have persisted and/or have
profoundly influenced European life:
Altogether western Europe had acquired a greater richness of forms, of corporate
life, a greater crystallization of habits into institutions, than any known elsewhere.
It had a remarkable ability to forge societal ties, more tenacious than almost any
others apart from those of the family and its extensions, clan or caste; ties that
could survive from one epoch to another, and be built into more elaborate combinations. But along with fixity of particular relationships went a no less radical
instability of the system as a whole.1ny
European civilization is not the product of capitalism. On the contrary, the character of capitalism can only be understood in the social and historical context of
its appearance.
The Effects of Western
Civilization on Capitalism

The development of capitalism can thus be seen as having been determined in form by
the social and ideological composition of a civilization that had assumed its fundamental perspectives during feudalism. The patterns of recruitment for slave and

24

EMERGENCE A N D L I M I T A T I O N S O F E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

mercenary we have reviewed held true for bourgeoisies and proletariats. According to
Robert Lopez, in the Carolingian Empire long-distance trade was dominated by Jews
and Italians.'1° In medieval Europe, Lopez and Irving Raymond have documented the
importance of Mediterranean traders at international fairs, and the development of
foreign merchant houses in the towns of the hinterland."' Fernand Braudel amplifies:
[Mlany financial centres, piazze, sprang up in Europe in towns that were of recent
origin. But ifwe look more closely at these sudden, and quite considerable developments, we shall find that they were in fact ramifications of Italian banking that had
by then become traditional. In the days ofthe fairs of Champagne it was already the
bankers from Sienna, Lucca, Florence, or Genoa who held the moneychanger's
scales; it was they who made the fortune of Geneva in the fifteenth century and
later those of Antwerp, Lyons, and Medina del Campo. . . .
In short, throughout Europe a small group of well-informed men, kept in touch
by an active correspondence, controlled the entire network of exchanges in bills or
specie, thus dominating the field of commercial speculation. So we should not be
too taken in by the apparent spread of "finance."112
For Spain under Charles V (1516-56) and Philip I1 (1556-98), the German Fuggers,
the Genoese, and other "international merchant firms" organized the state revenues,
exploited mines, and administered many of the most important estates.l13 And at
Constantinople, Genoese, Venetian, and Ragusan bankers and merchants shepherded
the trade and financial relations between Europe and the Ottoman E m ~ i r e . "For
~ the
Mediterranean towns of the sixteenth century, Braudel has observed the functions of
the "indispensable immigrant." To Salonica, Constantinople and Valona, Italian and
Spanish Jews, as merchants and artisans, brought new trades to further broaden an
already multicultured bourgeoisie.
There were other valuable immigrants, itinerant artists for instance attracted by
expanding towns which were extending their public buildings; or merchants, particularly the Italian merchants and bankers, who activated and indeed created such
cities as Lisbon, Seville, Medina del Campo, Lyons and Antwerp.l15
And in Venice:
A long report by the Cinque Savii, in January, 1607, indicates that all "capitalist"
activity, as we should call it, was in the hands of the Florentines, who owned houses
in the city, and the Genoese, who provided silver, between them controlling all
exchanges.l16

Just as Nuremberg had ravaged Bohemia, Saxony, and Silesia, Braudel asserts, it
was the Genoese who "blocked the development of Spanish ~apitalisml'l~~
It was, too,
the "indispensable immigrant" who complemented the urban proletariat incapable
of maintaining itself "let alone increas[ing] without the help of continuous immigration."l18 In Ragusa it was the Morlachi; in Marseilles, the Corsicans; in Seville, the

R A C I A L CAPITALISM

IS

Moriscos of Andalusia; in Algiers, the Aragonese and the Berbers; in Lisbon, Black
slaves; and in Venice, the immigrant proletariat was augmented by Romagnoli, Marchiani, Greeks, Persians, Armenians and Portuguese J e ~ s . " ~
The bourgeoisie that led the development of capitalism were drawn from particular ethnic and cultural groups; the European proletariats and the mercenaries of the
leading states from others; its peasants from still other cultures; and its slaves from
entirely different worlds. The tendency of European civilization through capitalism
was thus not to homogenize but to differentiate-to exaggerate regional, subcultural,
and dialectical differences into "racial" ones. As the Slavs became the natural slaves,
the racially inferior stock for domination and exploitation during the early Middle
Ages, as the Tartars came to occupy a similar position in the Italian cities of the late
Middle Ages, so at the systemic interlocking of capitalism in the sixteenth century, the
peoples of the Third World began to fill this expanding category of a civilization
reproduced by ~apita1ism.l~~
As a civilization of free and equal beings, Europe was as much a fiction in the
nineteenth century (and later) as its very unity had been during the Merovingian and
Carolingian eras. Both the church and the more powerful nobilities of the Holy
Roman Empire and its predecessor had been the source of the illusion in those earlier
periods. From the twelfth century forward, it was the bourgeoisie and the administrators of state power who initiated and nurtured myths of egalitarianism while seizing
The carnage
every occasion to divide peoples for the purpose of their d0minati0n.l~~
of wars and revolutions precipitated by the bourgeoisies of Europe to sanctify their
masques was enormous.
Eventually, however, the old instruments gave way to newer ones, not because they
were old but because the ending of feudalism and the expansion of capitalism and its
world system-that is the increasingly uneven character of development among European peoples themselves and between Europeans and the world beyond-precipitated
new oppositions while providing new opportunities and demanding new "historical"
agents. The Reformations in western Europe and then England that destroyed the last
practical vestiges of a transcendent, unified Christendom, were one manifestation of
this process of disequilibrium.
In England, as an instance, representatives of the great landowners, and agrarian
capitalism, in pursuit of their own social and financial destinies disciplined first the
church and then the monarchy and finally "the masses" through enclosures, the Poor
Laws, debtors' prisons, "transportation" (forced emigration), and the like.122The
contrasts of wealth and power between labor, capital, and the middle classes had
become too stark to sustain the continued maintenance of privileged classes at home
and the support of the engines of capitalist domination abroad. New mystifications,
more appropriate to the times, were required, authorized by new lights. The delusions
of medieval citizenship, which had been expanded into shared patrimony and had
persisted for five centuries in western Europe as the single great leveling principle,
were to be supplanted by race and (to use the German phrase) Herrenvolk, in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.lZ3The functions of these latter ideological
26

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

constructions were related but different. Race became largely the rationalization
for the domination, exploitation, and/or extermination of non-"Europeans" (including Slavs and Jews). And we shall have occasion in Part I1 to explore its applications beyond Europe and particularly to African peoples more closely. But while we
remain on European soil, it is Herrenvolkthat matters. In eighteenth-century England,
Reginald Horsman sees its beginnings in the "mythical" Anglo-Saxonism that was
In France (for example,
flown as an ideological pennant by the Whig inte1ligent~ia.l~~
Paul de Rapin-Thoyras and Montesquieu, and before them Franqois Hotman and
Count Henri de Boulainvilliers), in Germany (Herder, Fichte, Schleiermacher, and
Hegel), in north America (John Adams and Thomas Jefferson), "bourgeois" ideologists displayed the idea of the heroic Germanic race.lZ5And the idea swept through
nineteenth-century Europe, gathering momentum and artifice through such effects as
Sir Walter Scott's historical novels and Friedrich von Schlegel's philological fables.
Inevitably, of course, the idea was dressed in the accoutrement of nineteenth-century
European science. Herrenvolk explained the inevitability and the naturalness of the
domination of some Europeans by other Europeans. Though he reconstructed the
pieces back to front, Louis Snyder, for one, recognized the effect.
Racialists, not satisfied with merely proclaiming the superiority of the white over
the coloured race, also felt it necessary to erect a hierarchy within the white race
itself. To meet this need they developed the myth of the Aryan, or Nordic, superiority. The Aryan myth in turn became the source of other secondary myths such as
Teutonism (Germany), Anglo-Saxonism (England and the United States), and
Celticism (France).lZ6
Then, in the nineteenth century, modern nationalism appeared.
The emergence of nationalismLz7
was again neither accidental nor unrelated to the
character that European capitalism had assumed historically. Again, the bourgeoisie
of particular cultures and political structures refused to acknowledge their logical and
systemic identity as a class. Instead, international capitalism persisted in competitive
anarchy-each national bourgeoisie opposing the others as "natural" enemies. But as
powerful as the bourgeoisie and its allies in the aristocracy and bureaucracy might be
in some ways, they still required the co-optation of their "rational" proletariat in
order to destroy their competitors. Nationalism mobilized the armed might they
required to either destroy the productive capacities of those whom they opposed, or
to secure new markets, new labor, and productive resources.128Ultimately, the uneven
developments of national capitalisms would have horrifying consequences for both
Europe and the peoples under European dominations.
In Germany and Italy, where national bourgeoisies were relatively late in their formation, the marshaling of national social forces (peasants, farmers, workers, clerics,
professional classes, the aristocracy, and the state) was accomplished by the ideological phantasmagoria of race, Herrenvolk, and nationalism. This compost of violence,
in its time, became known under the name of fascism.129With the creation of fascism,
the bourgeoisie retained the full range of its social, political, and economic prerogaR A C I A L CAPITALISM

27

tives. It had the cake of the total control of its national society, an efficient instrument
for expanding its domination and expropriation to the Third World, and the ultimate
means for redressing the injuries and humiliations of the past. Again, not unexpectedly, slavery as a form of labor would reappear in Europe.130
But this goes far beyond our immediate purposes. What concerns us is that we
understand that racialism and its permutations persisted, rooted not in a particular
era but in the civilization itself. And though our era might seem a particularly fitting
one for depositing the origins of racism, that judgment merely reflects how resistant
the idea is to examination and how powerful and natural its specifications have
become. Our confusions, however, are not unique. As an enduring principle of
European social order, the effects of racialism were bound to appear in the social
expression of every strata of every European society no matter the structures upon
which they were formed. None was immune. And as we shall observe in the next two
chapters, this proved to be true for the rebellious proletariat as well as the radical
intelligentsias. It was again, a quite natural occurrence in both instances. But to the
latter-the radical intelligentsias-it was also an unacceptable one, one subsequently
denied. Nevertheless, it insinuated itself into their thought and their theories. And
thus, in the quest for a radical social force, an active historical subject, it compelled
certain blindnesses, bemusements that in turn systematically subverted their analytical constructions and their revolutionary project. But this is still to be shown. To that
end we will now turn to the history of the English working classes. Since these
workers were one of the centerpieces for the development by radical intelligentsias of
the notion of the proletariat as a revolutionary class, an inquiry into the effects of
racialism on their consciousness forms the next step in the demonstration of the
limits of European radicalism.

28

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

Class consciousness is the way in which the experiences are handled in cultural
terms: embodied in traditions, value-systems, ideas and institutional forms. If the
experience appears as determined, class consciousness does not. . . . [Cllass is
defined by men as they live their own history, and, in the end, this is its only
definition.'
And since I have argued that among these "cultural terms" was racialism, I shall hold
Thompson to his word.2 But first it is important to lay aside certain beliefs about the
circumstances in which the English industrial working classes made their appearance.
When one reviews the appearance of socialism in the nineteenth century, we are
repeatedly informed by its historians that the movement and its ideologies began with
the Industrial Revolution and the French Rev~lution.~
However, the ease by which so
many students of socialism have arrived at this association between a multifaceted
ideal and the twinned catalysts of modernity is somewhat dissipated by a closer look
at the more concrete realities that lay behind these abstractions of sudden, irreversible
change. The Industrial Revolution, for one, was never quite the phenomenon it has
become in the hands of some of its historians and in the popular mind. Much has
been questioned since the popularization of the phrase in Arnold Toynbee's Industrial
Revolution (1884). Still the legend lingers.
One might begin by noting that the large-scale [technical] economic and social
changes of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries: which are now most
frequently referred to as the Industrial Revolution, affected the whole of Britain's
Empire as well as parts of western Europe. This suggests that to comprehend the scale
on which this "revolution" operated requires a sense that it involved more than the
introduction of new techniques of production. The recruitment, training, and disciplining of labor, the transportation of goods and raw materials, the political and legal
structures of regulation and trade, the physical and commercial apparatus of markets,
the organization and instrumentation of communication, the techniques of banking
and finance, these too would have already had to be of a character that could accommodate increased commodity production. Their appearance was hardly instantaneous. On the contrary, their formation was organically determined by the economic
developments of previous centuries. Moreover, it is probable, as A. E. Musson has
argued, that the appearance of industrial production was neither revolutionary (in
the sense of a sudden, catastrophic change) nor uniquely British:
From a technological point of view . . . it may be said that the eighteenth century
witnessed little that was really revolutionary, and that the early Industrial Revolution was, in fact, based largely on . . . previous advances; even the steam engine was
a product of sixteenth and seventeenth century scientific theory and experiment,
while in other fields older techniques, such as water-powered machinery, were
developed and extended.
The majority of these technological developments from the late Middle Ages
onwards appear to have been introduced into England from the C ~ n t i n e n t . ~

30

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

Musson's interpretation is not generally shared, nor are the facts6 he marshals
to support his argument generally known. This is in large part a consequence of
the tendency of most historians and analysts of the processes of industrialization
to proceed along national (and much less frequently, subcontinental, i.e., western
European) lines. Indeed, it is by no means rare for the reader to encounter in otherwise very careful studies, the statement-in some form-that the Industrial Revolution occurred in England: a popular proposition, which appears to stem from the
confusion of the points of origin of technical rationalization for the sake of production with practical mechanical invention; and a further confusion of a national
economy with the ultimate impact of practical invention on an economic system
already extensively characterized by international production (e.g., English cotton,
sugar). Regardless, the systematic and detailed study of the technical and social consequences of industrial production is still largely located in the historiography of
late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century Britain (though one should note
that E. J. Hobsbawm is certainly correct that it would be more accurate to envision
several industrial revolutions occurring subsequent to the initial period of the Industrial Age).7
Poverty and Industrial Capitalism

For the working classes in Great Britain, the immediate and terrible consequences of
the Industrial Age are generally, if not precisely, known.8 In purely economic terms,
there is the direct evidence of the workhouses that began in the eighteenth century
but achieved their more permanent character in the two decades following Rev.
Though pauperRobert Lowe's experiment in deterrent welfare in 1818 at Bir~gham.~
ism (which Hobsbawm defines as "the permanent core of poverty"lO) as we have
suggested earlier was by no means a new phenomenon in England or western Europe
before the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, in England, at least, the numbers of
paupers increased somewhat rapidly during this latter period. This seems to have
been the direct result of both the interruption of rural life by the adoption of reaping
and threshing machines, and by the policy of land enclosures inspired by agricultural capitalism that, between 1760 and 1810, included five million acres of common
fields." Elsewhere, in the industrial cores, unemployment accompanied the severe
business cycles of the period.12 The workhouse, whose truest function was to act as
asylums of last resort for the poor, was one response of the ruling classes. Characteristically, this response was the rationalization of an almost total misperception of
the basis of pauperism: the presumption that the dispossessed and unemployed
lacked work discipline.13
The recurring cycles of unemployment in the first half of the nineteenth century
were of a scale to give any observer pause. Hobsbawm's comments on the slump of
1826, and Henry Mayhew's observations of the rise of unemployment that would
persist from 1847 to 1851are instructive. Hobsbawm found the figures

THE ENGLISH W O R K I N G CLASS

31

so startling that they can bear a good deal of deflation. They suggest that in the
hard-hit areas of Lancashire between 30 and 75 per cent of the total population
might have been destitute in the course of this slump; in the woollen areas of
Yorkshire, between 25 per cent and loo per cent; in the textile areas of Scotland,
between 25 per cent and 75 per cent. In Salford, for instance, half the population
was wholly or partly out of work, in Bolton about one third, in Burnley at least 40
per cent.14
Yet what Hobsbawm as a historian found difficult to accept, Mayhew as a contemporary observer (described by E. P. Thompson as "incomparably the greatest social
investigator in the mid-century")15 found matters of fact:
[Elstimating the working classes as being between four and five million in number,
I think we may safely assert-considering . . . particular times, seasons, fashions,
and accidents, and the vast quantity of over-work and scamp-work . . . the number
of women and children . . . continually drafted into the different handicrafts . . .
there is barely sufficient work for the regular employment of half of our labourers,
so that only 1,500,ooo are fully and constantly employed, while 1,500,000 more are
employed only half their time, and the remaining 1,500,000 wholly unemployed,
obtaining a day's work occasionally by the displacement of some of the others.'"
Moreover, when we are informed by Hobsbawm that paupers housed in the purposely punitive workhouses of the nineteenth century, though themselves victims of
the applied disgust of their social and economic superiors, probably ate substantially
better than significant proportions of farm-laborers and urban workers," we are
chastened from the too easily presumed distinctions between employed and unemployed labor and pauperism. All three constituted an underclass that extended into
the ranks of skilled workers.18
Further evidence for the Industrial Age's impact on the British working class and
the poor is to be found in the studies of housing (the term would presumably apply to
conditions of survival ranging from the makeshift night shelters in the doorways,
alleys, cellars, and streets of the towns and in the open fields beside village roads, the
parish and union workhouses themselves and the worker cottages-structures quite
different concretely and subjectively from the benign pastoralism now associated with
the term),19 morbidity, mortality, child-labor, the physical conditions of labor, and
food c o n s ~ m p t i o n In
. ~ ~general, the more reliable the data, the more firm is the
impression of a progressively depressed population during the period under discussion. Still, all these figures are in some sense superficial to (though helpful for sensing) the real issue that is the experience of the men, women, and children who made
up the English poor and working classes. Just what did they make of their lives?
Much ofwhat can be measured is merely the conditions of their lives and not their
social, moral, and ideological contents. The objective conditions, rhythms, and patterns of the proletarianization of English labor frame that experience, but do not
determine it, thus the social eruptions of that class have persistently resisted a mono32 E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

tonic ~orrelation.~~
In 1930, J. L. Hammond, who along with his colleague Barbara
Hammond contributed so much to the history of British labor, put this point well
enough to be repeated:
[I]f we are considering the kind of social life that was created by the Industrial
Revolution, we find that in one sense no class of work-people escaped the Industrial Revolution. For all workers alike there was the same want of beauty, the same
want of playing fields or parks, the same want of pageants or festivals, the same
speeding up of industry, the same absence of anything calculated to create what
Sophocles called "the temper that buildeth a city's wall" . . . the ugliness of the new
life, with its growing slums, its lack of beautiful buildings, its destruction of nature
and its disregard of man's deeper needs, affected not this or that class of workers
only, but the entire working-class p o p ~ l a t i o n . ~ ~
In terms of the "happiness and unhappiness of men and women," Hammond would
write elsewhere, "if you look at the life of the age of the Industrial Revolution . . .you
are struck at once by its extraordinary poverty."23
The Reaction of English Labor

Hammond's view of the sort of concerns that focused the minds of the laboring
classes as they came face to face with the dislocations of the industrial world is
in part substantiated by the political and social movements among the underclass
that so distressed the upper and middle classes of the earliest moments of this period.
(In 1831, James Mill had written to an associate, "Nothing can be conceived more mischievous than the doctrines which have been preached to the common people.")24
One quite obvious expression of working-class anger toward the impoverishment of
their social lives and, as Hammond called it, "Imagination," is the movement to
which Hobsbawm refers as the "machine breakers."25 Distinguishing between those
movements where attacks on private property and machinery were tactics designed to
force concessions from employers, and those movements energized by workers "concerned, not with technical progress in the abstract, but with the practical twin problems of preventing unemployment and maintaining the customary standard of life,
which included nonmonetary factors such as freedom and dignity,"26Hobsbawm
linked the revolts that echoed the ideals initially recorded among the Spitalfields
weavers in 1675. Hobsbawm tells us of successive generations of weavers at Spitalfields
rioting in 1719 ("against wearers of printed calicoes"), in 1736, and again, in the
1760s, against machines; in 1778-80, machine-breakers appeared in Lancashire. Luddism, proper, appeared in 1802, peaked in the 1811-q period (spinningjennys), before
largely disappearing after the suppression of the farm labor machine-breakers in 1830
in the southern counties, in East Anglia, and the midland^.^^ More interestingly, these
Luddite movements not only reflected a resistance to the machine as a tool of capitalist production on the part of workers, but also served to reveal the existence of a
broader social hostility to capitalist industry:
T H E E N G L I S H W O R K I N G CLASS

33

The fully developed capitalist entrepreneurs formed a small minority. . . .The small
shop-keeper or local master did not want an economy of limitless expansion,
accumulation and technical revolution. . . . His ideal was the secular dream of all
"little men:' which has found periodic expression in Leveller, Jeffersonian or Jacobin radicalism, a small-scale society of modest property-owners and comfortablyoff wage-earners, without great distinctions of wealth or power. . . . It was an
unrealizable ideal, never more so than in the most rapidly evolving societies. Let us
remember, however, that those to whom it appealed in early nineteenth-century
Europe made up the majority of the population, and outside such industries as
cotton, of the employing class.2s
A more critical confirmation of Hammond's thesis on the significance that must be
attached to the subversion of the social and cultural integument of feudal society in
Britain by the imposition of industrial production, is suggested elsewhere. It would
appear that the ideological and social response of the English working classes to the
immanent domination by a new social order was not restricted to class-specific or
economistic behaviors. The class consciousness of English workers did not strictly
adhere to the logic of working-class formation premised on capitalist exploitation
and modeled by Marx from the histories of the French and English bourgeoisie^.^^
Indeed, the more profound reaction to an industrial capitalist order found among
English "producers" in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, largely deterred
those political and social consequences of proletarianization that had already become
the dogma of English radical thought and expectation in the years immediately
following the Great Revolution in France. The development ofAnglo-Saxon chauvinism, the earliest form of English nationalism, and the appearance of rather extreme
forms of racism among the English working class determined the form and characteristics that English working-class consciousness assumed. The parochialisms of
ethnocentrism and race hostility constituted a response that was both a native of and
a consequence to the loss of precapitalist social integrations. Of the first, Anglo-Saxon
chauvinism, George Rude would note:
[Olne of the most remarkably persistent beliefs of all was that perfect "Liberties"
had existed under the Saxon Kings and that these had been filched, together with
their lands, from "freeborn" Englishmen by the invading Norman knights under
William the Bastard in 1066. This myth of the "Norman Yoke" persisted until
Chartist times [i84os] and was handed down by generations of Levellers, Whigs
reared on "revolution principles," London eighteenth-century radicals and democrats nurtured on the more recent doctrines of "popular sovereignty" and the
"rights of man."30
The existence of this "constantly recurring theme in popular ideology" in English
social history eventually took the form of nationalism, but more particularly as a
nationalism incorporating a virulent xenophobia. The processes behind the appearance of a racially conscious working-class nationalism require some rather close
34

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

attention, if for no other reason than that they have been obscured in radical English
histories written appropriately as responses to works less sympathetic to and less
comprehensive of the conditions and struggles of the English industrial working
classes.31
English society was the first to have developed an industrial proletariat among its
working classes.32Yet well before the peaks of Luddite and Chartist protests and
during the heyday of the earlier Owenite socialism, the supranationalist class identity
that Thompson has noted among English workers and in the "heroic culture" they
produced between the French Revolution and the defeat of Chartism (while demonstrating its erratic course) had begun its retreat before prot~nationalism.~~
This was
one aspect of the "lost vision" ofthe English working classes in the 1830s, and one that
Thompson was forced to reluctantly recognize:
It is easy enough to say that this culture was backward-looking or conservative.
True enough, one direction of the great agitations of the artisans and outworkers,
continued over 50 years, was to resist being turned into a proletariat. When they
knew that this cause was lost, yet they reached out again, in the Thirties and Forties,
and sought to achieve new and only imagined forms of social control.34
It would reappear in the mid-i86os, but by then what would become the general labor
union movement (replacing an earlier and explicit consciousness of a class struggle
for political power) had so progressed as to be so much under the sway of labor
bureaucrats that not even the direct intervention of Marx was sufficient to more than
.~~
the
briefly deflect English working-class consciousness from n a t i ~ n a l i s mDespite
evidence that in 1864, the year of the founding of the International Working Men's
Association (the I.W.M.A., or First International), spokesmen for British labor addressed themselves publicly to what Royden Harrison characterizes as the "national
liberation and unification movements in America, Italy and Poland," by 1871the more
persistent thrust of trade unionism was once more dominant:
In 1871 Marx was opposed to an attempt at a proletarian revolution in Paris. But
when it was made, his loyalty to the working class and his own past record left him
no choice but to give it his unflinching support. By identifying the International
with the Commune, Marx occasioned the break with the majority of English
labour leaders and sealed the fate of the I.W.M.A., a course of action from which
there was no honourable release. . . . Marx and the English trade union leaders
disowned each other.36
The formulation of an explanation for the revival and dominance of trade-union
consciousness among the English working classes is not a simple task. For one, it must
take account of what Thompson terms the "counter-revolution" of the dominant
classes that struck such decisive blows to working-class radicalism in 1834,1835, and
1848;~
it ~must also encompass the historical processes by which industrial forms of
production were established in England, including the patterns of labor recruitment
from the villages and countryside of England (and the subsequent forms of work disTHE ENGLISH W O R K I N G CLASS

35

cipline established to proletarianize the recruits), and the divisions of labor that characterized the international structure of British ~ a p i t a l i s mBut
. ~ ~perhaps most important to the understanding of the evolution of working-class nationalism in Britain,
and more to the issue here, is the role another nationalism-Irish nationalismplayed in the formative period of English working-class development and its concomitant construction of English working-class culture. Moreover, the part played by
Irish workers in the revolts of English labor in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries being the social and historical expression of Irish nationalism, must also
be noted.
The Colonization of Ireland

As far as the English ruling classes might have been concerned, the nineteenth century
was inaugurated by the Irish Rebellion of 1798.~
Having
~
already survived the American and French Revolutions, the "immovable object," Ireland and what the English
termed "the Irish Question," became "the biggest issue in late-Victorian politics, as
perhaps it had been for most of the century."40In any case, their response to what they
perceived as a particularly pernicious manifestation of Jacobin conspiracy and French
interference was to dissolve what had passed for an Irish parliament and to declare in
1800 an Act of Union between Ireland and the United K i n g d ~ m .In~ ~effect, the
English state was setting aside the ineffective structures and instrument of indirect
rule for those of a more direct and familiar d ~ m i n a t i o nThis
. ~ ~ substitution of one set
of institutions for another, in the long view, proved to be indifferent for the purposes
of the English state though it logically followed the evident interests of English capital
and Anglo-Saxonist ideology.43The Irish Question became much more a part of the
nineteenth century than it had been for the eighteenth. It would appear, however, that
its character had been fixed long before.
James Anthony Froude, in his history of The English in Ireland, provides his reader
with what is both a detailed political history and a demonstration of the extent and
sort of images of the Irish that had become fixed in the minds of Englishmen. Froude
began by informing his reader that when the "military aristocracy" of the Normans
invaded Ireland in the twelfth century, "the Irish . . . were, with the exception of the
clergy, scarcely better than a mob of armed savages."44Having defeated the defenders
of the island, Froude continues, the Normans had three courses of action toward the
conquered peoples: extermination, armed occupation, or armed coloni~ation.~~
The
Normans, Froude laments, chose an entirely different path:
The Normans in occupying both England and Ireland were but fulfilling the work
for which they were specially qualified and gifted. . . . They did not destroy the Irish
people; they took the government of them merely, as the English have done in
India, dispossessing the chiefs, changing the loose order of inheritance into an
orderly succession, giving security to life and property, and enabling those who
cared to be industrious to reap the fruits of their labours without fear of outrage
36

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

and plunder. Their right to govern lay in their capability of governing and in the
need of the Irish to be governed.46
The end result was an unfortunate one for the civilizing mission of the Normans.
Instead of extending "English" civilization to the inhabitants of the island, the conBy
quered people absorbed their Norman rulers racially, culturally, and p~litically.~~
the second half of the fourteenth century, England having undergone the disasters detailed above, judicial, and political attempts at ensuring a specifically AngloNorman presence in the four counties of the English Pale (Dublin, Meath, Kildare,
and Louth) were in actuality indications of the futility of the designs that had followed the conquest. Indeed, the term "conquest" was a conceit of English political
history. With respect to their political relations with England, Ireland, and more
precisely the Pale, staggered between indirect rule and home rule, depending on the
resources of the English state, the preoccupations of English feudal society, and the
capacities and proclivities of various feudal lords in Ireland to command national or
English loyalties. In brief, such was the situation until the sixteenth century. In
economic, and often in political terms, feudal Ireland was almost entirely independent from England.
This mode of English sovereignty in Ireland was to be initially pierced during the
reign of Henry VII (1485-i509), and finally reshaped altogether during that of Henry
VIII (1509-47). Between these first two kings of the Tudor Dynasty (1485-i603),
English policy toward Ireland managed to produce a bizarre series of results: an
administrative unification of Ireland under the Earl of Kildare (a Celticized Norman
family); the fomenting of a rebellion led by Kildare as the champion of Catholicism
following the rupture of the English state with the Papacy; and with the suppression
of rebellion and the execution of some of its leaders, a new subjugation of Ireland and
its most powerful families. The stabilization of the English feudal monarchy had
brought with it the possibility of transforming Ireland into an English colony.48
Once Elizabeth I (1533-1603) was established on the English throne-following the
brief and chaotic reigns of her siblings, Edward VI (1547-53) and Mary I (1553-58)English policy toward Ireland, not for the first or last time, changed dramatically:
The English set upon the plan of putting Ireland to plantation as the best means to
subdue the island. The most extensive of these plantations was to be that in Londonderry, established in 1608, and roughly contemporaneous to the Virginia Plantation. Englishmen and lowland Scotsmen were lured to Ireland by the promise of
free land. Their job was to drive the Irish into the woods and fortify their own
villages.49
The suppression of the rebellions that followed (the major rebellions were led by
Shane O'Neill in 1559, the Fitzgeralds of Desmond between the years 1568-83, and by
O'Neill, the former earl of Tyrone, and O'Donnell from 1594-1603),~~
required such
extensive expenditures that at least one historian, R. D. Edwards, surmises that "the
poverty of the crown, which was a serious factor in the seventeenth-century conflict
THE ENGLISH W O R K I N G CLASS

37

with parliament, was at least in part due to commitments over Ireland."51Whether
this was the case or not, a more lasting pacification of Ireland was not achieved until the final years of Elizabeth's reign, despite the persistence of legends which put
it otherwise:
The reputation of the Elizabethan settlers, won for the most part in other fields,
remains; but their Irish enterprise, lacking all sustained sense of purpose, proved
deservedly transient. And so in succeeding centuries the sombre tale of Plantation,
of rebellion, of Cromwellian violence, of civil and religious war, of the Penal Code,
mocked the illusion of a final Elizabethan ~ e t t l e m e n t . ~ ~
Though it was Elizabeth's administration that had initiated the policy, it was under
James I (1603-25) that the colonization of Ireland by planters and farmers from
Scotland and the western counties of England assumed significant proportions (first
in Ulster, and then proceeding to the alienation of Irish lands in north Wexford,
Longford, and Leitrim). By 1641, that is in the midst of the reign of James's successor,
Charles I (1625-49), William Petty, the seventeenth-century English economist and
statistician, would estimate that there were 260,000 Undertakers (as the Protestant
colonists were called) among the one and a half million people living in Ireland.s3It
was also in this year that the Irish rebelled again, mounting the most serious and
lethal effort to reject English rule since the Conquest. In English historiography, this
rebellion became known as the massacre of 1641. This rebellion was to last for 11years,
a fire that ultimately had to be attended to by Cromwell himself. What followed was
what Froude, with inadvertent irony, would have us know as the Penal Era (16521704).'~It would be during this latter period that Ireland assumed the characteristics
that typified the Irish experience until the early twentieth century:5scolonized, absentee land ownership; Catholic persecution and Protestant privilege; the land alienation
of its laboring classes; the corrupt and punitive administrations and official terror. It
was again during this Penal Era that much of the restrictive legislation written by the
English parliament would appear to complete the derationalization of the Irish econmy:^^ acts against the marketing of Irish cattle in England, 1681; against Irish woolens and colored linens, 1699; and against glass, 1746. Once these policies had accomplished their purpose, free trade could be re-established:
By 1801, free trade between Great Britain and Ireland was a reality; however, Irish
industry, with one exception-linen, could not withstand English competition.
After the Union, Ireland, therefore, became more rural, more agricultural, more
economically specialized than it had been previo~sly.~~
Ireland had been transformed into a dependent sector of the English economy.
Such were the historical experiences that informed Irish nationalism in the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries. The psychic and intellectual characters of
the Irish workers who emigrated to England in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries to complement the labor of the emergent English proletariat were determined

38

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

to a large extent by these same events. Certainly, the social and political relations
of the immigrant Irish workers with their English counterparts were severely constrained by a past consisting of almost unmitigated hostility between the interests that
had come to be identified with their respective national entities.
English Working-class Consciousness
a n d t h e Irish W o r k e r

The Irish immigrant was an important element in the industrial English working
class (by 1841,400,000 Irish-born immigrants were living in Great Britain).58He was,
as Thompson describes the Irish worker of the early nineteenth century, "the cheapest
labour in Western Europe."59Irish workers were recruited and used to fill
the heavy manual occupations at the base of industrial society [which] required a
spendthrift expense of sheer physical energy-an alternation of intensive labour
and boisterous relaxation which belongs to preindustrial labour-rhythms, and for
which the English artisan or weaver was unsuited both by reason of his weakened
physique and his Puritan t e m ~ e r a m e n t . ~ ~
Still Thompson's explanation for the need to complement the English working classes
was not the rationale that prevailed at the time. Engels was much closer to the English
manufacturing class, and perhaps more accurate in his assessment of their motives
when he observed that "the Irish have . . . discovered the minimum of the necessities
of life, and are now making the English workers acquainted with it."61For whatever it
is worth, it would have been inconsistent with the tenets of Anglo-Saxonismto detach
the English worker from a racial hierarchy that was quite adequate in locating the
deficiencies of the Irish "race."62The Irish worker having descended from an inferior
race, so his English employers believed, the cheap market value of his labor was but its
most rational form.
Setting aside for the moment popular prejudices, the English working classes,
especially those at the industrial cores of English industry, had more occasion than
their superiors to form very different attitudes toward their Irish counterparts. Indeed, in the early nineteenth century, the opportunities for the formation of successful social movements built on Irish and English workers were frequent and seemed
promising. Irish labor leaders took prominent roles in working-class agitation in
England (in the Chartist movement for example)63and it is a widely held belief that
working class movements and organizations in England in general were modeled
from Irish organizational methods.64The extent to which the direction of a unified
and radical working-class movement had been realized and subsequently so easily
dispatched in the early nineteenth century, has troubled at least one historian of the
period so deeply that it has occasioned uncharacteristic speculation. E. P. Thompson,
reviewing the observations that Engels had made on the positive (revolutionary)
effects consequent to the mixture of the two "races" in the working class ("the more

THE E N G L I S H W O R K I N G CLASS

39

facile, excitable, fiery Irish temperament with the stable, reasoning, persevering Eng l i ~ h " )himself
, ~ ~ paused to reflect on the political possibilities that English capitalist
production had inevitably produced:
It was an advantage to the employers, at a time when precision engineering coexisted with tunnelling by means of shovel and pick, to be able to call upon both
types of labour. But the price which had to be paid was the confluence of sophisticated political Radicalism with a more primitive and excitable revolutionism. This
confluence came in the Chartist movement. . . . Once before, in the 1790s . . . it
seemed possible that English Jacobinism and Irish nationalism would engage in a
common revolutionary strategy. If O'Connor had been able to carry Ireland with
him as he carried the north of England, then the Chartist and "Young Ireland"
movements might have come to a common insurrectionary flash-point.66
Chartism, however, proved to be the high point of cooperation between the Irish and
English elements of the working classes in Er~gland.~'This movement, organized
behind a People's Charter, the platform of universal suffrage, annual parliaments, and
parliamentary salaries; and represented by demonstrations, petitions, riots, and rebellions, though neither politically nor ideologically homogeneous, had once held the
promise of an enduring organization. Instead, it collapsed totally, from within and
without. After the late 1840s, the tentative efforts that might have resulted in a politically significant class solidarity were frustrated by events of both political and economic character.
In England itself, the defeat of the Chartist protests came with the extent and kind
of reaction of the English ruling classes aptly recounted by Thompson:
[I]t was the organ of middle-class Radicalism, The Times, which led the outcry for
examples of severity. The advice was followed: "On the 9th of January [i8y],
judgment of death was recorded against twenty three prisoners, for the destruction
of a paper machine in Buckingham; in Dorset, on the nth, against three, for
extorting money, and two for robbery; at Norwich, fifty-five prisoners were convicted of machine-breaking and rioting; at Ipswich, three, for extorting money; at
Petworth, twenty-six for machine-breaking and rioting; at Gloucester, upwards of
thirty; at Oxford, twenty-nine; and at Winchester, out of upwards of forty convicted, six were left for execution. . . . At Salisbury, forty-four prisoners were
convicted."
And it was a Whig Ministry again that sanctioned, three years later, the transportation of the laborers of Tolpuddle in Dorsetshire, who had had the insolence to form a
trade union.68
Following this era of overt class warfare and its accompanying persecution, the
English working class, as we have seen, turned toward trade unionism as its primary
form of activity. In part, this was also a reflection of the social consequences concomitant to the growth of English trade and production. The English worker in the second

40

EMERGENCE A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

half of the nineteenth century began to enjoy certain of the perquisites of a labor
aristocracy in a world system.69
In Ireland, the late 1840s was the time of the great harvest disasters that came to be
known as the Potato Famine or the Great Hunger. Its immediate consequences were
both the momentous emigration from Ireland to the United States and the precipitation of an even more extreme nationalism among Irishmen both home and abroad.70
Together, these political and economic setbacks-on the one hand to English and
Irish industrial workers, and on the other to Irish farmers, peasants, and industrial
workers in Ireland-resulted in both an ideological and physical drifting apart of the
two "races." From the mid-nineteenth century on, among English workers, the ideology of English nationalism gained ascendancy over the counterideology of international class solidarity and socialist hopes. This was a part of a conservative reaction
(trade unionism) to political defeat and economic growth, but it also had to do with
the radical directions the Irish working classes (and the nationalist Irish middle class)
had taken.71As Marx had often stated in one fashion or another: "The English
working class will never accomplish anything before it has got rid of Ireland."72Early
on, of course, it had been the presence of the Irish immigrant as a distorting and depressive element in the labor market that had produced markedly anti-Irish sentiment
among English workers. This hostility had merely confirmed and complemented the
racial feeling extant among England's ruling classes, the historical bases of which we
traced above. Later, from the 1850s on, the development of sympathy among English
workers toward Irish nationalism became even more remote with the appearances of
Irish Radical (middle-class) nationalism-the Home Rule movement-and the more
radical peasant and working-class nationalist movement that assumed the form of a
revolutionary agrarian movement.73By the end of the nineteenth century, the English
people were at one with respect to the Irish Question. Wherever exceptions existed,
they were associated with political weakness and inconsequentiality.
The Proletariat and the
English Working Class

The terms "English" and "Irish have been used in the preceding discussion for
convenience. It would have been most difficult to be both precise while treating the
subject at an appropriate length. One hopes, however, that such conveniences have
not escaped the reader's attention, given the consistent emphases here on ethnic and
cultural conservaticisms and their importance. Though Ireland is but a small island,
the integration of the Irish peoples was by no means an accomplished fact by the time
of the Great Famine and the major emigrations from Ireland in the nineteenth
century. Indeed, some students of the emigrations are quite specific as to the regions,
local cultures, dialect groups, and occupations from which successive emigrants were
drawn and how these particularities influenced historical movements.74The Irish
peoples had been in the process of achieving a national identity and a national culture

THE E N G L I S H W O R K I N G CLASS

41

since the Norman-led conquest. They had not done so when the time came for the
mass relocation that has marked their collective history for the past 200 years. Theirs
is, then, a national identity deeply marked by the Irish dispersion.
But even more to the point, we have seen that the generic terms "the English
working class" or "the English proletariat" mask the social and historical realities that
accompanied the introduction of industrial capitalism in England and its Empire.
Social divisions and habits of life and attitude that predated capitalist production
continued into the modern era and extended to the working classes located in Britain
specific social sensibilities and consciousness. The English working class was never
the singular social and historical entity suggested by the phrase. An even closer study
of its elements-for we have merely reviewed the more extreme case with the Irishwould reveal other social divisions, some ethnic (Welsh, Scottish, and more recently
some regional, and others essentially industrial and ocWest Indian and A~ian),'~
cupational. The negations resultant from capitalist modes of production, relations of
production, and ideology did not manifest themselves as an eradication of oppositions among the working classes. Instead, the dialectic of proletarianization disciplined the working classes to the importance of distinctions: between ethnics and
nationalities; between skilled and unskilled workers; and, as we shall see later in even
more dramatic terms, between races. The persistence and creation of such oppositions within the working classes were a critical aspect of the triumph of capitalism in
the nineteenth century.
Neither Marx nor Engels were unaware of the proletariat's failure to become a universal class.76Both studied the Irish Question closely, were active in the attempt to
resolve its destructive impact on the historical processes of English working-class
.~~
formation, and commented on its import for future proletarian ~ r g a n i z a t i o nNevertheless, the impact of their experience with the English proletariat on their theory
of the proletariat's historical role appears to have been slight. Shlomo Avineri observes that:
The universalistic nature of the proletariat does not disappear in Marx's later
writings, when his discussion concentrates mainly on the historical causes of the
emergence of the proletariat. What was at the outset a philosophical hypothesis is
verified by historical experience and observation: the universalistic nature of the
proletariat is a corollary of the conditions of production in a capitalist society,
which must strive for universality on the geographical level as well.78
This would appear to confirm one of Engels's more famous estimations of their work:
Marx and I are ourselves partly to blame for the fact that the younger people
sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due to it. We had to
emphasize the main principle vis-a-vis our adversaries, who denied it, and we had
not always the time, the place or the opportunity to allow the other elements
involved in the interaction to come into their rights. But when it was a case of

42 E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S O F E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

presenting a section of history, that is, of a practical application, it was a different
matter and there no error was possible.79
Engels was absolutely correct, though the instance to which he was immediately
responding might deceive.
The distinction that Engels was making here between historPo and theory can, at
one level, be read as an attempt to differentiate between the functions of the publicist
and the scientific philosopher. Such an interpretation would in fact trivialize Engels's
intent. Like Marx, Engels understood that their attempt to construct a total system of
"the materialist conception of history" would bear the imprint of their historical
moment.81Not only ideology and philosophy but all human activity was of such
a nature:
We make our history ourselves, but, in the first place, under very definite assumptions and conditions. Among these the economic ones are ultimately decisive. But
the political ones, etc., and indeed even the traditions which haunt human minds
also play a part, although not the decisive one.82
What history demonstrated to Marx and Engels was that dialectical change was never
a total negation of the conditions from which it generated, but a transformation of
the meaning, intent, and directionality of the elements and forces of the preexisting
whole. This meant that their work, itself the critique of "bourgeoise society" and
industrial capitalism, would some day-when the material forces of society had progressed beyond their stage of development in the nineteenth century-be subject to
criticism (negation). That which was ideological ("partial consciousness") in their
study of history would be transcended by a necessarily higher form of social thought
corresponding to its historical moment.
Perhaps the most obvious of the ideological constructs that appear in the work of
Marx and Engels (and most of the Marxists who have followed them) are the notions
of the proletariat as the revolutionary subject, and the class struggle between the
proletariat and the bourgeoisie. They persist in Marxian thought in precisely the
terms suggested by Isaiah Berlin:
[Tlhe Marxist doctrine of movement in dialectical collisions is not a hypothesis
liable to be made less or more probable by the evidence of facts, but a pattern,
uncovered by a non-empirical historical method, the validity of which is not
q~estioned.~~
To comprehend this "haunting" of radical European thought, and its Eurocentrism, it
becomes appropriate to review the socialist tradition from which Marx and Engels
emerged and that had for its historical setting the late eighteenth century and the early
nineteenth century. Here we will discover the groundings of the pattern that thrust
European Marxism into an era for which it was not prepared: the modern world.

THE ENGLISH W O R K I N G CLASS

43

important focus of medieval socialism, did not obviate the retention and enunciation
of communistic d ~ c t r i n eFor
. ~ more than a millennium and a half, often based upon
specious ecclesiastical authority,
it became a commonplace amongst canonists and scholastics that in the first state
of society, which had also been the best state, there had been no such thing as
private property because all things had belonged to all p e ~ p l e . ~
Indeed, the communal life was taught and practiced among both the monastic and lay
lower orders of the church. The church thus incorporated the oppositions of feudal
privilege and Christian dogma. Eventually, this contradiction would erupt, informing
the heresies of the fourteenth century and beyond as well as the revolutionary eschatology of the numerous peasant revolts that occurred in the last Middle Ages.5
Both the doctrine of primitive communalism and the movements of insurrection
.~
the history of feudal
would become a part of the socialist t r a d i t i ~ n Surveying
Europe, Marx and Engels recognized the predecessors of socialist praxis in such
movements as the sixteenth-century Anabaptists in Germany, and in seventeenthcentury England, the Levellers; Engels had called them forerunners of the "modern
proletariat."' On their part, the historians of nineteenth-century socialist constructions place their points of origin quite firmly on French soil and among the sons and
daughters of the most politically and intellectually mobile elements of the Third
Estate: the bourgeoisie, the petit bourgeoisie, and the artisan^.^ Moreover, these
historians of the socialist movement unanimously assert that the French Revolution
(an event upon which there is less agreement among them) was the more dramatic of
the two moments that spurred the development of socialist ideas. As we have already
noted, somewhat peculiarly, the Industrial Revolution, that is, the appearance of a
technologically vigorous and mechanically imaginative industrial capitalism as the
second moment that allowed for the subsequent development of socialist thought,
has been seen as an English phenomenon.
Socialist Thought:
Negation of Feudalism or Capitalism?

Just as the historical character of capitalist development and the working classes
associated with that development can be better understood through the medieval
civilization in which they were created, a similar task applies to the history of socialism. Socialism as an articulated opposition to social inequality and poverty was first
addressed to the adaptation of bourgeois society to feudal structures. Socialist critiques of society were attempts to further the bourgeois revolutions against feudalism.
It possessed then a moral character:
The critique of property that arose with the liberalism of eighteenth-century France
was not. . . geared to the industrial system at all. Aside from advocating that private
property be eliminated, it had no economic orientation. Rather, the concern of
46

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

such a characteristic communist thinker of the era as Morelly was entirely moral,
and the abolition of private ownership was for him simply the focal point of a
rationalized social and political structure that would then bring about the moral
regeneration of man.9
As Marx and Engels made obvious in The Communist Mani;festo (as polemicists, their
intention was to emphasize their differences with those socialist traditions that had
preceded them, not to identify with them), the socialism with which they were
contemporaries was generally founded on the attempt to distinguish and preserve the
Socialism
rights of property (bourgeois) from the wrongs of property (fe~dalism).'~
was an expression of the social and intellectual liberation and enlightenment of a
strata of European societies for which the terrors of feudalism and the power of the
Absolute State were no longer natural, immediate, or inevitable. As an ideology
committed to the historical and providential force of science, reason, and rationality,
it was largely an obviation of those ideologies and structures that had served to
legitimate the manifold forms of feudal and imperial authority: caste hierarchies,
aristocratic privilege, the absolute power of the prince (later, the state) over the peasantry, the authority and wealth of the church, and finally, the poverty and powerlessness of the masses." The cause to which early socialism was addressed was the freeing
of the secularized soul:
The highest point attained by contemplative materialism, that is, materialism which
does not comprehend sensuousness as practical activity, is the contemplation of
single individuals in "civil ~ociety."'~
To accept the notion, so frequently put forth, that early socialist thought was the
ideological and theoretical negation of capitalist society (industrial capitalism during
the stages of competitive and monopoly capitalism) is to presume a historical relationship that is not in evidence. As Schumpeter has so cleverly cautioned:
[Tlhe question arises whether the economic interpretation of history is more than
a convenient approximation which must be expected to work less satisfactorily in
some cases than it does in others. An obvious qualification occurs at the outset.
Social structures, types and attitudes are coins that do not readily melt. Once they
are formed they persist, possibly for centuries, and since different structures and
types display different degrees of this ability to survive, we almost always find that
actual group and national behaviour more or less departs from what we should
expect it to be if we tried to infer it from the dominant forms of the productive
process. . . . Such facts Marx did not overlook but he hardly realized all their
implication^.'^
The initial appearances of modern socialism and its forms are more closely related to
feudal society than is suggested by the later shapes socialist thought would assume.
Socialism began as one expression of the bourgeois society and the bourgeoisie that it
came to oppose explicitly.
SOCIALIST THEORY A N D N A T I O N A L I S M

47

The materialist historicism of socialism is thus mistaken. That "nature" of socialism to which scholars like George Lichtheim14 have devoted so much attention is
a philosophical-ideological construct-an interpretation of the history of socialist
thought that fixes on that variant of the tradition which was a response to the revolutionary failures of the mid-nineteenth century. Combined with the persistent thrust
of Marx's materialism toward a positive science-the critique of the capitalist mode of
production, and the political-historical myths of Leninist revolution, the dominant
legend of the socialist tradition replaces a history of socialism. The function of the
alternative "history" of socialism is to obscure the obvious: that the origins of socialist
thought are not with the European proletariat but the middle classes.15
It was not the working classes in Germany who were at the origin of socialist
ideas. . . . [Slocialist ideas were spread by a party of the intellectual elite, who saw
the proletarian masses as a possible instrument of social renewal.16
Indeed, the history of European socialism is dotted by a consistent opposition to the
practical activity and consciousness of proletarian classes. As Marx and Engels themselves declared:
The question is not what goal is envisagedfor the time being by this or that member
of the proletariat, or even by the proletariat as a whole. The question is what is the
proletariat and what course of action will it be forced historically to take in conformity with its own nature.17
The intelligentsia was by far the stratum most likely to discern that course of action.
Of course, Lenin, in substituting the revolutionary party for the conscious proletariat,
agreed with Marx and Engels, both theoretically and programmati~ally.~~
Unfortunately, neither of them recalled to any significant political purpose, Marx's warning,
in 1851, of the nature of their own class as it was demonstrated in Paris of 1848:
[Olne must not form the narrow-minded notion that the petty bourgeoisie, on
principle, wishes to enforce an egoistic class interest. Rather, it believes that the
special conditions of its emancipation are the general conditions under which
modern society can alone be saved and the class struggle avoided.
. . . [Tlhe democrat, because he represents the petty bourgeoisie, therefore a
transition class, in which the interests of two classes are simultaneously deadened,
imagines himself elevated above class antagonism generally.19
As a class whose historical character included the ideological and administrative
mediation of bourgeois rule and domination, the petit bourgeoisie tended to produce
political and conceptual lattice-works from which its inevitably derivative authority
might extend and absorb the whole of society.20So as utilitarianism and functionalism had served as bases for those elements of the petit bourgeoisie enveloped
by bureaucracy, commerce, and the professions-that is, the mainstream of a capitalist social order-socialism became the pennant of those members of the petit

48 E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S O F E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

bourgeoisie appalled by the cruel lack of restraint and the chaotically foreshortened
vision of the bourgeoisie.
From Babeuf t o Marx:
A Curious Historiography

The industrial working classes constituted a minority of the workers of England
and France at the moments when modern socialism began to take form.21Indeed,
much of the revolutionary agitation that marked this period was pushed forward by
crowds dominated by artisans and shopkeepers. (Albert Soboul, for instance, indicates that though the most powerful element of the Third Estate of the French
Revolutionary period was bourgeois, two-thirds of the order, that is its Jacobin wing,
were artisans and shopkeeper^.)^^ England and France (the latter as the most industrialized economy in continental Europe) were still essentially agrarian societies when
their working-class movements assumed class-specific ideological and organizational
forms in the 1830s and 1840s. Even then, for example, Rude speaks of the importance
of "the survival of traditional ideas and values" in movements that were to come so
close to power.23The relationship between the social movements of the lower classes
and the socialist intelligentsia was at least ambiguous.
Students of socialism generally argue that the socialist tradition that would come to
be closely identified with an industrial proletariat begins in 1795 with the Conspiracy
of Equals in which Franqois-Noel (Gracchus) Babeuf was so prominent.24G. D. H.
Cole, with apparent approval, notes that:
Babeuf's Conspiracy continued to be regarded by revolutionary Socialists, and is
to-day regarded by Communists, as the first plain manifestation of the proletariat
in revolutionary action, proclaiming from afar the new revolution which was
destined to complete the work begun in 1789.'~
Lichtheim, quite naturally, makes an identical remark before proceeding to the declaration of a direct legacy from Babeuf to Lenin:
Babeuf and his associates appear as the precursors of nineteenth-century radicals
like Blanqui and, at a remove, of the Russian revolutionary Populists of the 1860s
and 1870s whose heritage was subsequently assumed by the Bol~heviks.~~
Though Lichtheim's lineage may be problematic, certain similarities are obvious
between the moments at which the Babeufists and the Bolsheviks emerged from their
respective revolutionary situations. Since it is the Conspiracy of Equals that is likely to
be the lesser known, some detail might be appropriate to demonstrate this apparent
similarity.
By 1794, that is Year I1 of the French republic, the most radical of the several
bourgeois-dominated governments established in Paris had been overthrown and its
leading citizens (most prominently Robespierre) had been executed, exiled, or forced

SOCIALIST THEORY A N D N A T I O N A L I S M

49

to flee to the countryside and beyond.27The reaction that followed, under the Directory, had abolished the radical legislation and the egalitarian policies of a directed
economy decreed the year before.28The limitations on prices (the maximum), the
taxation of the wealthy classes, national assistance to the poor, free and compulsory
education, the confiscation and distribution to the poor of emigre property, were
either repealed or discontinued in practice. As had been the case on several previous
occasions since the aristocracy's power had been challenged, the revolutionary crowds
of France's towns and cities, and the peasants in the countryside began to suspect that
the Revolution was being betrayed.29This time the traitors were the reactionary
bourgeoisie, those members of the class whose wealth and power the Revolution had
already secured. The executions of the leaders of the Jacobin "left wing" of the
Convention, removed from the Parisian sans-culottes those elements (the Montagnard) which had been most responsive to its demands. Those members of the left
wing that had survived its repression had gone underground, frequently organizing
themselves into secret societies and clubs. One such group was the remnant of the
Union du Pantheon: the Conspirators. While Babeuf and his comrades were negotiating in 1796 with the Jacobin underground, they were betrayed by a military associate,
Crisel, acting as a spy for the D i r e ~ t o r yAt
. ~their
~ subsequent trial in Year V (1797),the
intent of the Conspiracy of Equals was revealed for the first time:
[Tlhey had projected a seizure of power by a small revolutionary group of leaders,
who were then to establish a revolutionary government based on their following
among the Parisian local societies, with the intention of summoning as speedily as
possible a National Assembly, to be elected under the democratic franchise of the
abortive Constitution of 1793, which had never been allowed to come into force.
Pending the bringing into action of this Constitution, Babeuf and his followers
proposed to establish a temporary dictatorship, based mainly on the Paris workers;
but they had no theory of revolutionary-much less of proletarian-dictatorship as
more than an expedient of transition over a short period to a fully democratic
Constitution based on manhood suffrage. They did, however, propose to proceed
immediately. . . to large measures of expropriation and redistribution of property
holdings on a basis of communal appropriation and enjoyment of all goods.31
Such were the beginnings of the notion of proletarian dictatorship in European
socialism. It is a heritage that tends to confirm Marx's later characterizations of the
petit bourgeoisie while suggesting some of the political forms and consequence of
such presumptions. It is also useful to note that at no point had the conspiracy
become a popular or mass movement. Cole observes
that Babeuf's movement [nlever really took shape as a nationwide revolutionary
campaign. It found its support, as the Jacobins had done, mainly in the larger
towns and pre-eminently in Paris, where its following was attracted to it mainly by
the conditions of scarcity and unemployment that followed upon the reluctance of
emancipated peasants to keep the towns supplied with the necessaries of life. Nor
SO

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

did it ever command more than a small fraction even of the urban proletariat. It
was a conspiracy of a few who aimed at drawing after them the large elements of
urban discontent arising mainly out of sheer hunger.32
It would be another thirty years before a working-class movement gave evidence of its
influence, and much longer than that before the principles of a socialist society
became dominant in European social movements.33
Following the execution of Babeuf and his co-conspirators, it is not until almost
mid-century, the years noted for the appearance of Marx and Engels, that thinkers in
the socialist tradition became actively engaged in working-class politics. The historians of socialist thought take this period for what it was, in relationship to their
subject, and unanimously commit themselves to exegeses. The literary, pamphleteering, and historical works of forgotten and dimly remembered writers, with the rare
interruptions of a Buonarroti, Blanqui, or Blanc, are sequenced to form the tapestry
of socialist thought. It is a period dominated by eccentrics, visionaries, and didacts.
The wistful trails of Godwin, Paine, Fourier, Saint-Simon, Cabet, Pecquer, lesser and
grander lights, preoccupy the historians, along with the most often short-lived utopian communities associated with some of them. The agitations, rebellions, riots, and
struggles of artisans, wage laborers, peasants, and slave laborers are largely irrelevant
to the tradition in the early nineteenth century and mostly constitute a background
"noise" in this the era of the socialist writer. The "historical" issues that arise are each
writer's contribution to socialist theory, and whether or not the "systems" that were
constructed should properly be categorized as "socialist." This is a particularly telling
historical project since so many of the historians, the Coles, Lichtheims, Beers, are
themselves sympathetic to the tradition they reconstruct. Their work becomes a
demonstration of the independence of socialist theory and social movements from
one another. When once again they collide, in the 184os, 1870s, and early 19oos, each
had assumed forms and prerogatives only slightly tolerable to those of the other.
While the movements of the working classes tended toward an accommodation with
capitalism in the form of trade unionist demands, abandoning revolutionary initiatives to those whose social origins were, most often, the peasant and petit bourgeois
classes, socialist theory became more and more dominated by the figure of the
revolutionary proletariat.
Marx, under the influence both of his readings of Hegel and his intense encounters
with a number of intellects of his own generation who had identified themselves as
Hegelians (David Strauss, Bruno Bauer, Karl Koppen, Moses Hess, Lorenz von Stein,
and Ludwig F e ~ e r b a c h )had
, ~ ~sought to construct an epistemologicalsystem founded
on materialism as a metatheoretic;the currency underneath social structures and forms:
My inquiry led me to the conclusion that neither legal relations nor political forms
could be comprehended whether by themselves or on the basis of a so-called
general development of the human mind, but that on the contrary they originate in
the material conditions of life . . . that the anatomy of this civil society. . . has to be
sought in political economy.35
SOCIALIST THEORY A N D NATIONALISM

SI

History, for Marx, became the antagonistic play of the relations of living social
categories whose existence was predicated on the particular characters of production
and property that had been the basis of social life.36Political economy was thus the
most fundamental of historical inquiries. The materialist conception of history situated the objective and necessary forces of a society, distinguishing their significance
from those categories of human activity that were the result of pure speculation
(idealism) and ideology. As Marx's theoretical work proceeded, the progressive tendency to place the study of capitalist forms of production, exchange, and distribution
at the center of his work became more and more pronounced. By 1847, capitalism had
become his primary subject. His infrequent sojourns into the study of revolutions
were dictated by their occurrence (he would write in 1850 articles later published as
The Class Struggles in France and, in 1851, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte
as studies of the 1848 revolutionary movement in France, and, in 1871, The Civil War
in France as a statement of the Paris Commune of the same year) and the degree to
which Marx believed them to be important testaments to the political and methodological efficacy of the materialist conception of history.37
Mam, Engels, and Nationalism

The bulk of the almost two decades that Marx spent on his "Economics~' largely
sandwiched between the revolutions of 1848 and the appearance of the rather more
ambiguous "International" in 1864, though substantially marked by intensive research, writing, mathematical training, and theoretical development, was also a period of extreme frustration. Plagued by what he constantly referred to as "bourgeois"
troubles (indebtedness, familial demands, and disruptions) and debilitating illnesses
(carbuncles and boils),38Marx's celebrated temper and sometimes mean preoccupations propelled him into drawn quarrels, some petty but no less vicious (with Karl
Vogt; Ferdinand Lassalle, "the dirty Breslaw Jew"; Giuseppe Mazzini; and even one,
probably the only one, with Engels following the death of Mary Burns);39most the
result of Marx's proprietary attitude toward a "party" (the Communist League),
which he himself in 1860 had declared defunct since 1852.~~
One of these disputes,
however, is particularly instructive here for it reveals in dramatic terms the ideological
restraints and theoretical bounds that placed Marx and Engels at an especial disadvantage in their confrontation with the form of nationalism beginning to surface
by the mid-nineteenth century. Because nationalism is the most important ideology
of our time, its treatment by Marx and Engels and later Marxists can be informative
both with respect to the essence of Marxist thought as well as the nature of ideology.
The nationalism in question was German, a nation from which Marx and Engels
had been in enforced exile for several years. Exile, however, is hardly a satisfactory
defense in this instance since Marx and Engels, as leaders of the German democratic
(socialist) movement, were in almost daily touch with German correspondents. It is
true that as emigres from Germany, Marx and Engels can be expected to have drawn
increasingly distant from the ambitions and moods of working-class organizations at
52

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

home. Franz Mehring, one of Marx's most sympathetic biographers, notes that in
Marx's and Engels's argument with Lassalle over the consequences for the German
revolutionary struggle of a war between Germany (Prussia and the German League)
and Italy (the Kingdom of Sardinia) and France, "the two friends had to pay for
having lost touch with conditions in Germany for so long."41 Given the worldhistorical scope that Marx and Engels attempted to achieve in their work, however,
Mehring's intervention by interpretation appears excessively apologetic and not particularly instructive. He failed to come to terms with the political-ideological effect
that Marx's notion of the logic of capitalist development would incur.
In brief, the situation was this. Neither Italy, Germany, or France (and for that
matter Austria) had yet achieved territorial configurations that conformed to the
ambitions of their ruling and military elites, nor the natural (ethnic and linguistic)
affections of their nationalistic citizenry. Cavour, the Prime Minister of the Sardinian
kingdom, had gradually been converted from a repressive antinationalist to an extremely skilled unificationist by the persistent development and growth of nationalist
sympathy and organization both on the Italian peninsula and among the exiles his
government had been so instrumental in r e l ~ c a t i n gBy
. ~ the
~ outbreak of the Crimean
War in 1854, Cavour had become convinced that the French army would be the
critical tool for the expulsion of Austria from central Italy and the achievement of a
decisive advantage for Piedmont (continental Sardinia) over the Papal States (Cavour
appears to have presumed the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies beyond his reach). Cavour
saw to it that Sardinian troops accompanied the British and French armies when they
invaded Russia in 1854. The Crimean War ultimately resulted in the weakening of
both Austria and Russia, and at the peace conference in Paris (1856), Austria's Italian
possessions (Venetia and Lombardy) became a matter for discussion as a breach of
the Vienna settlement (1815). It appears that diplomatic considerations and the brutal
and continuing suppression of Italian rebels by Austria had joined to make Austria's
position in Italy untenable. By July 1858, Napoleon 111, convinced on the one hand, as
a Bonaparte, that Italy was ancestral country,43and on the other that French power
required a larger destiny than that bounded by the defeat of his imperial uncle,
had met secretly with C a v o ~ and
r ~ ~agreed on a joint venture against Austria: Piedmont was to lure Austria into a declaration of war. The French army would intervene against the aggressor Austria. France would be rewarded by the ceding of the
Savoy and Nice provinces; Sardinia, by incorporating Lombardy, Venetia, and the
central Duchies, would become the Kingdom of North Italy. Mehring continues
the story:
On New Year's Day, 1859, Bonaparte received the Austrian Ambassador in audience
and informed him of the French intentions, whilst a few days later the King of
Sardinia announced to the world that he was not deaf to the heart-rending appeals
of the Italian people. These threats were perfectly understood in Vienna . . . the
Austrian government was clumsy enough to let itself be manoeuvred into the role
of attacker. Half-bankrupt, attacked by France and threatened by Russia, it was in a
SOCIALIST THEORY A N D N A T I O N A L I S M

53

difficult position . . . so it therefore sought to win the support of the German
League. . . . [I]t tried to persuade the League that the maintenance of Austrian
oppression in Italy was a matter of vital national importance for Germany.45
In order to comprehend the response of Marx and Engels to this situation it is first
necessary to know more about the Germany from which they came, and the Germany
to which Austria appealed.
The defeat of the Napoleonic armies and the 1815 settlement of Vienna that followed, had not resulted in the reunification of Germany. The "Holy Alliance" of the
Reich, whose most recent manifestation was an alliance between Prussia, the Confederation of the Rhine, and Austria, which had been dissolved in 1806, was entirely
frustrated by a statesmanship whose architect was Austria's Metternich and that was
dominated by the interests of Austria, Russia, and Great Britain. Between 1815 and
1866, Germany-the Deutscher Bund-consisted of 39 states or principalities (including the four free cities of Hamburg, Bremen, Lubeck, and F r a n k f ~ r t )Even
. ~ ~ during
the War of Liberation (1812-15), the particularisms of the German principalities had
been persistent, causing Johann Friedrich Bohmer's father to write to his son, the
future historian, "Unhappily, those fighting for the great patriotic cause are not so
much Germans as Bavarians, Wurttemberger, Hessians, Saxons, Nassauer, WurzWithin the Bund (or
burger and even subjects of the petty state of Y~enburg."~~
League), Prussia emerged as the most powerful competitor to Austria on the basis of
its army and its bureaucracy (a legacy of French rule).48
W. 0. Henderson indicates that Germany, at the beginning of the nineteenth
century, was much less industrialized than France. The industrialization of Germany
really began in the 1830s and 1840s with the introduction of steam-powered machinery and the importation of skilled artisans from England (to operate mule-jennys in
the cotton mills of Saxony, build textile machinery and steam-ships, and inaugurate
power loom weaving in Lower S i l e ~ i a )Up
. ~ ~through the mid-nineteenth century,
however, Germany was still overwhelmingly agricultural. And despite an estimated 38
percent rise in population between 1815 and 1845,
the proportions of town and country dwellers remained virtually unchanged. Few
towns had recovered from the effects of the Thirty Years War and the stagnation of
the eighteenth century, and at the beginning of the nineteenth century the total
population of all the free cities and university towns of Germany was scarcely the
equivalent of the population of Paris. Hence neither industrial capitalists nor
industrial workers existed as a serious political force, and the towns were still, as in
the eighteenth century, dominated by a professional and bureaucratic middleclass, which had little to gain by radical political change.50
Still, it was largely out of this middle class that early nineteenth-century liberalism
and nationalism found their social base.51Barraclough, indeed, expressed some surprise that "radical and national feeling" would persist so long in Germany as to
achieve popular support in the German revolutions of 1848. Yet when crowds of
54

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

artisans and workers rose in Vienna and Berlin in that year, the liberal elements of the
middle classes were not enthusiastic, choosing politically to abdicate their momentary advantage rather than provide any further momentum to the r e v o l ~ t i o n sWe
.~~
shall see that Marx and Engels, as members of that generation and class that had
committed themselves to the democratization and reunification of Germany, were
thus deeply implicated and consequently ambivalent toward the events that affected
these interests between the liberal defection of 1849 and the assumption of power in
Prussia by Bismarck in 1862. Lichtheim is quite correct to observe that:
Neither the Marxian theory of democracy nor the Marxian view of national evolution is fully comprehensible unless it is remembered that they took shape on
the morrow of the worst defeat democracy and nationalism had yet suffered in
When the liberal parliamentarians abandoned the attempt at democratic reforms
in May 1849, the future of German liberalism and nationalism was remanded into
the hands of the Prussian Junker class. The first, liberalism, was to be destroyed as
a threat to that class, the second retained as a weapon of that class against Austrian
ambitions:
Bismarck. . . realized that, despite the setback of 1848-1849, German liberalism and
nationalism supported by Austria were still a serious threat to Prussian particularism and Prussian aristocratic privilege. . . . Liberalism was fatal to the social order
for which Bismarck stood; but nationalism, carefully handled, could be made to
subserve the purposes of Prussia. . . . He separated German national aspirations
from the liberal background which, from 1813 to 1848 and in centuries past, had
given them meaning. Nationalism had grown strong as an instrument of liberal
reform, as an essential means of breaking the stranglehold of particularist interest
over the German people. . . . [H]e offered the German people unity, but at the
expense of the radical reform which alone made unity worth while.54
Bismarck, as we know, was successful, but not on the basis of sheer energy or diplomatic acumen. The economic prosperity, between 1850 and 1871, of an industrializing
Germany had made radical (that is liberal) reform less urgent,55while the ubiquitous
international machinations and the persistent hostility of Napoleon I11 to German
unity underscored the logic of nationalism. As we return to the first months of the
war, these dynamics and their history should be kept in mind. And though the era of
Bismarck takes us beyond the moment of the Italian war, some familiarity with these
later events is useful since they indicate the momentum of certain social processes
more clearly evident to Lassalle than to Marx or Engels.
Engels's reaction to the outbreak of war in 1859 between Austria, Sardinia, and
France, and to the German nationalist movement that had attended the prelude of
war, was to publish a pamphlet entitled Po und Rhein.56Lassalle acted for Engels as his
German agent with Franz Duncker, while Marx gave his enthusiastic support to the
project. In his pamphlet, Engels argued that though the Po river boundary was of no
SOCIALIST THEORY A N D NATIONALISM

55

military significance to Germany (in these terms, Engels added, France's claims were
more defensible), politically, the French encroachment on the Po was the beginning
of an attempt to recapture the Rhine frontier. On this basis, Engels insisted, the PO
was where Germany must make its stand with Austria. The pamphlet was published
in Germany, anonymously, on the advice of Marx so as to give the impression that the
author was probably a Prussian general-a stratagem that was apparently quite successful, to Marx's great satisfaction. He wrote to Engels, congratulating him on the
fact that in his induced identity he was now being celebrated in their homeland as a
military expert.57The intent of Marx and Engels, their "ulterior motive" as they put it,
has been reconstructed by Mehring:
First of all both Marx and Engels believed that the national movement in Germany
was a really genuine one. . . . The instinct of the people demanded war against Louis
Bonaparte as the representative of the traditions of the First French Empire, and
this instinct was right.
Secondly, they assumed that Germany was really seriously threatened by the
Franco-Russian alliance. . . .
And finally. . . [i]n their opinion the German governments needed goading on
by the national movement, and what they then expected was described by Engels in
a passage of a letter to Lassalle . . . : "Long live a war in which we are attacked
simultaneously by the French and the Russians, for in such a desperate situation
with disaster immediately threatening, all parties, from those which are now ruling
to Zitz and Blum, would exhaust themselves, and the nation would then finally
turn to the most energetic party in order to save itself."58
But what Mehring did not recognize as an important element of both Engels's and
Marx's position was a fundamental historicism. Engels had made clear in Po und
Rhein that the logic of capitalist development supported German nationalism but not
Italian nationalism:
All changes (in the map of Europe), if they are to last, must in general start from the
effort to give the large and viable European nations more and more their true
national boundaries, which are determined by language and sympathies, while at
the same time the ruins of peoples, which are still found here and there and which
are no longer capable of a national existence, are absorbed by the larger nations and
either become a part of them or maintain themselves as ethnographic monuments
without political ~ignificance.~'
We shall return to the implications of this theme more than once.
Lassalle, we know already, disagreed with Marx and Engels. He quickly responded
to Engels's essay by writing a pamphlet of his own, The Italian War and Prussia's Task.
In it he urged the Prussian government to side with France and Italy against Austria
on the grounds that "the complete destruction of Austria was the preliminary condition of German unity?O As he would inform Marx by letter, he wrote in this way so as

56

EMERGENCE A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

to appeal to a public mentality (which he believed Marx and Engels to be unaware of)
in order to discredit a policy (Prussian defense of Austria) that he believed inevitable:
My dear Marx, You simply cannot conceive the idiocy of opinion here which is all
for war with France, and which threatens to sweep away in its current even those
democrats who are not thoroughly independent. I should regard the popularity of
the war as a much greater misfortune than the war itself-and there can be no
doubt that at the present moment a war would be extremely popular.
. . . I have pointed out to the government an extremely national and popular way,
which in abstracto it could very well follow, but which in concreto would prove
utterly impracticable. For the very reason that the government will not take this
course, it seems to me that I have found a means of making it fundamentally
unpopular. I do not know whether you have read enough of the German newspapers to be well informed concerning the popular mood. The press is in full blast
for the devouring of all Frenchmen and voices an unqualified Gallophobia. (Napoleon is a mere pretext; the underlying ground is the revolutionary development of
France) . . . a war supported by a blind uprush of popular feeling would be most
prejudicial to our democratic d e ~ e l o p m e n t . ~ ~
Lassalle, whose pamphlet was described by Marx as "an enormous blundeP2 and
"monstrously false,"63prompting Marx to observe to Engels that "we must now
absolutely insist on party discipline or everything will be in the
was decidedly
more insightful as to the nature of German nationalism than either Marx or en gel^.^^
Mehring, largely free of the restraints that bound Lassalle to a solicitous concern for
MarxS feelings, presented Lassalle's thesis with less discretion than Lassalle and in
language much more appropriate:
In his eyes a Franco-German war in which the two greatest Continental peoples
would rend each other for mere nationalist delusions, a really popular war against
France not prompted by any vital national interest, but nourished by pathologically irritated nationalism, high-flown patriotism and childish anti-Gallicism, was
a tremendous danger to European culture and to all really national and revolutionary interests.66
Thus the dispute between Lassalle, Marx, and Engels had not merely raised questions
as to the nature of the political relationship between them (that is whether Lassalle
had the right to disagree publicly with an anonymously authored position) or the
extent to which Marx and Engels were themselves victims of a Germanic chauvinism.67Certainly these were important issues, but they could just as well be understood
as the inevitable excesses of personality and political ambition to which intellectuals
such as Marx and Engels in the midst of a workers' movement fall prey.68 More
important, however, is the effect that political economy, the central analytical tool of
their materialist conception of history, had on their ability to conceptualize correctly
the ideological character of industrial social movements.

S O C I A L I S T THEORY A N D N A T I O N A L I S M

57

In Marx's historical view, the "genesis of the industrial capitalist" was inextricably
tied to the development of the state. It was by means of the state that the proletariat
came into being, transformed as producers from peasants to wage laborers,
Thus were the agricultural people, first forcibly expropriated from the soil, driven
from their homes, turned into vagabonds, and then whipped, branded, tortured by
laws grotesquely terrible, into the discipline necessary for the wage system.69
and as consumers into the home market.
The many scattered customers, whom stray artisans until now had found in the
numerous small producers working on their own account, concentrate themselves
now into one great market provided for by industrial capital. Thus, hand in hand
with the expropriation of the self-supporting peasants, with their separation from
their means of production, goes the destruction of rural domestic industry, the
process of separation between manufacture and agriculture. And only the destruction
of rural domestic industry can give the internal market of a country that extension
and consistence that the capitalist mode of production requires70
Having secured the home market, the further expansion of capitalism required of
the state that it assume new forms and additional functions. "National debts, i.e. the
alienation of the state-whether despotic, constitutional or republican-marked with
its stamp the capitalistic era."" First in Holland, and subsequently in England (but
with precedents in Genoa, Venice, Spain, and Portugal), the primitive accumulation of
capital that was the basis for manufacturing had been accomplished through the
agencies of a "colonial system, public debts, heavy taxes, protection, commercial wars,
et~."~~-all
the attributes of state structures. Marx conceived the triumph ofbourgeois
society over feudalism as a victory won by the most extraordinary instrument of class
struggle: the state. He was inclined, then, as we have already noted in en gel^,'^ to see the
nation (the manifest form of the state in the nineteenth century) as a sine qua non of
bourgeois rule.74In turn, bourgeois rule and capitalist production were necessary for
the development of the socialized production that the immanent society req~ired.'~
The development of the industrial proletariat is, in general, conditioned by the
development of the industrial bourgeoisie. Only under its rule does the proletariat
gain that extensive national existence that can raise its revolution to a national one,
and only thus does the proletariat itself create the modern means of production,
which becomes just so many means of its revolutionary emancipation. Only bourgeois rule tears up the material roots of feudal society and levels the ground on which
alone a proletarian revolution is possible.76
Marx had initially presumed (with an enthusiasm of youth, according to Lichtheim) that the bourgeoisie would reproduce itself everywhere, "In one word, it
creates a world after its own image."77However, while Marx clearly envisioned the
historical role of the bourgeoisie in world-historical terms,7Rhe also maintained the
contradictory view of its historical development as occurring in national terms.7yThe
expansion of the bourgeoisie meant the extension of the nation-state:

58

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the scattered state of the
population, of the means of production, and of property. It has agglomerated
population, centralized means of production, and has concentrated property in a
few hands. . . . Independent, or but loosely connected provinces, with separate
interests, laws, governments and systems of taxation, became lumped together into
one nation, with one government, one code of laws, one national class-interest, one
frontier and one customs tariff.80
It may be that at this stage of Marx's development, his universe consisting of western
Europe might dissolve this contradiction through the vision of an immanent panEuropean formation. It may be that his ideas demonstrated an unresolved strain
between his predilection as an idealist-trained philosopher-theorist and his processes
of inquiry as a social and historical analyst. Further, Marx may have already begun the
tendency, much more obvious in his later work, to confuse and confound his theory
of historical change by extrapolating from French social history a sense of the ultimate character of class struggle in capitalist society (in spite of the rather primitive
development of industrial capitalism in France, the dominance of a maritime bourgeoisie, the presence of a capitalist aristocracy, and a working class more peasant and
artisan than industrial proletariat) while determining the nature of capitalism from
the more industrially developed England.s1 Last, as a propagandist, he may simply
have been more concerned with the political impact of rhetoric on his audience than
with analytical precision. Whichever of these explanations one chooses, none really
reconciles the existence in the early work of two opposing views of the nature and
character of bourgeois society. In time, Marx would relinquish one for the other.
Interestingly enough, Marx's disavowal of the genesis of capitalism in western
Europe as a general "historico-philosophic theory" is best illustrated by letters written
to Russian Marxists who, from the 1870s on, became engaged in controversies concerning the process of industrialization and social development that Russia should
assume in order to achieve a social revolution. In November 1877, Marx drafted a
letter (never sent) to the editors of the Russian socialist journal, Otechestvenniye
Zapiski. He meant to object to the use a Narodnik author, N. K. Mikhailovsky, had
made of his work in an attack on Marx's sympathizers in Russia. Marx wrote:
The chapter on primitive accumulation does not pretend to do more than trace the
path by which, in Western Europe, the capitalist order of economy emerged from
the womb of the feudal order of economy. . . . That is all. But that is too little for my
critic. He feels he absolutely must metamorphose my historical sketch of the genesis of capitalism in Western Europe into a historico-philosophic theory of the
general path every people is fated to tread, whatever the historical circumstances in
which it finds itself, in order that it may ultimately arrive at the form of economy
which ensures, together with the greatest expansion of the productive powers of
social labour, the most complete development of man. But I beg his pardon. (He is
both honouring and shaming me too much.Y2

SOCIALIST THEORY AND NATIONALISM

59

Four years later, in a letter written to Vera Zusulich, the Russian revolutionary who
would later work with Lenin in London, Marx would quote from the French edition
of Capital as a response to her inquiries on "the agrarian question" in Russia: "The
'historical necessity' of this movement is thus explicitly restricted to the countries
of Western Europe. The reason for this restriction is indicated . . . in chapter XXXII."83
Yet the historical figure of the nation, conceived in terms of its historic role in the
development of capitalist production, remained an aspect of the acceptance or rejection of nationalist movements by Marx and Engels. Nationalism was acceptable if its
success resulted in the construction of a "viable" industrial nation. In the same vein, it
was unacceptable ("nonsense," "impracticable," "fanatical") for nationalist movements to threaten what Engels had termed "true [i.e. productive] national boundaries" in Po und R h e i r ~As
. ~ late
~ as 1888, Engels was still giving his blessing to German
nationalism on this basis:
One can see from all this that the desire for a united "Fatherland" had a very
material foundation. It was no longer the dim impulse of the students of the
Wartburg days, when "strength and courage burned in German souls," . . . neither
was it any longer the much more down-to-earth call for unity advanced by the
lawyers and other bourgeois ideologists of the Hambach Festival . . . no, it was the
demand arising from the immediate commercial needs of practical businessmen
and industrialists for the elimination of all the historically out-dated rubbish
which obstructed the free development of trade and industry, for the removal of all
the unnecessary irritations, which all his competitors had overcome, and which the
German businessman had to put an end to at home if he wished to play a part on
the world market.85
Though Marx and Engels substantially agreed about the historical elements and
characteristics of European nations extant in the mid-nineteenth century, there were
some differences between them respecting the nationalism, or what they came to call
the national question (the difference was linked in all probability with whatever it was
behind Engels's contempt for the Slavs).x6In The Communist Manifesto and The
German Ideology, Marx had stressed proletarian internationalism over nationalism,
observing, as we have seen, that it was in the nature of the bourgeoisie to have
national interests and retain them, but in the nature of capitalism to dissolve national
interests both politically (through the formation of an international class: the proletariat) and economically (through the creation of a world system). Later on, as
noted, particularly in his considerations of Irelandx7Marx began to deal with the
question of national liberation more deliberately, and, perhaps, realistically. Here
Marx came to insist that national liberation was the precondition for proletarian
internationalism and simultaneously the destruction of bourgeois economic, political, military, and ideological hegemony.88He did not, however, extend this analysis to
India, Mexico, or Italy.8yEngels, on the other hand, tended to recognize and emphasize a counterrevolutionary tendency of national liberation movements, which he
had sensed since observing the social upheavals of 1848-49. Including the Scots,
60

EMERGENCE A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

Bretons, and Basques with the Southern Slavs, Engels had declared these peoples
"non-historic nations,"
remnants of a nation, mercilessly crushed, as Hegel said, by the course of history,
this national refuse, is always the fanatical representative of counterrevolution and
remains so until it is completely exterminated or de-nationalized, as its whole
existence is in itself a protest against a great historical r e v o l ~ t i o n . ~ ~
Michael Lowy's observation that Marx's treatment of national liberation tended toward economism?' while Engels's was legalistic92is a bit simplistic, if not entirely
incorrect. Their habits of thought tended toward the recognition of different forces if
not configurations in human experience. The familiar, in the instance of Marx, was of
things philosophically dialectical and reflective, with Engels it was the mundane and
the practical instincts of the market place. While Marx tended, at the level of the
historical epic, to discover the forces of the new world disguised in epiphenomena1
forms, Engels's commitment to the revolutionary vision determined for him ultimately, the uses of history (and science). With respect to nationalism, Marx was the
more likely to recognize that as an ideology its historical significance was ambiguous
at worst, and Engels that such ambiguity constituted an unacceptable threat.
As analysts of nationalism, their legacy then was ambiguous. It appears that with
respect to the actual nationalist movements of their time, in Germany, Poland, eastern, or southern Europe, neither Marx nor Engels achieved an extraordinary comprehension or fully escaped the parochialisms of the day. Rather, their historical
method provided them with a means of supporting their predispositions on the
historical worth of peoples and the varying capacities of the several European national movements. Their own nationalism whether "unconscious or subconscious:'
as Davis is forced to
or otherwise, made them generally unsympathetic to
the national liberation movements of peoples ( e g , the Russians and other Slavs) that
historically threatened what Marx and Engels believed to be the national interests of
the German people. An opposition to movements such as these could be rationalized
by their failure to accord with the practical requirements of a viable political economy. On the other hand, certain European peoples were destined to be unified by the
state and capitalist development. For the time being, in the interests of socialism, the
proletariat of such societies were best advised to support their bourgeoisie. Germany,
they argued, fitted that circumstance:
For some other countries, nationalism still meant struggling for national unification, as with the East European countries from Poland to the Balkans; or fighting
for national independence against the imperialist powers, as with the Irish, the
Czechoslovaks, and the oriental and African peoples. Marxism had still to answer
the questions of how far these nationalist movements were justified, how far they
were a legitimate concern of the working class, and what attitude the proletariat of
all countries should take to them. Was there a general principle involved? If so,
Marx and Engels had not clearly enunciated it.94
SOCIALIST THEORY A N D NATIONALISM

61

Marxism and Nationalism

After Marx and Engels, the most significant contributors to the national question
were the Bolsheviks, the Radical Left (Luxemburg, Pannekoek, Strasser, and Trotsky),
and the Austro-Marxists (Karl Renner and Otto Bauer). Luxemburg attacked the
notion of the right of self-determination as abstract, metaphysical, bourgeois, and
utopian.y5Her argument was based largely on both the economistic strain in Marx's
thought, which underscored the cultural element of national divisions, and on Engels's characterization of "non-historic nations." Both Anton Pannekoek and Josef
Strassery6saw the nation as an ideology comparable to religion, which disappears
with the advent of socialism. Opposing Otto Bauer's position, which identified the
national question in psychocultural terms,97Pannekoek and Strasser rejected the
theory of a national culture that could be appropriated for its own interest by the
working class.
The permutations were (and are) seemingly endless, each evidently possessing its
own rationales. In the characterization of nationalism by Marxist theorists, presumably general principles of historical or objective nature were opposed to factors of
special and short-term significance; but every debate responded to contemporary
events by attempting to encompass the evidences of new sciences, new events, and the
effects of immediate political and ideological struggles. And the antagonists often
reversed their opinions with the appropriate shows of "new understanding." Unfortunately, the relegation of consciousness in the Marxian logic to a reflex of the relations
of production and the frequent preoccupation with capitalism as a system determined by its own objective laws and the motivating force of historical change, most
consistently led to the conclusion that nationalism among worlung classes was contrary to the historical movement of modern societies. In this sense, nationalism was a
backward ideology, often a means of deflecting the class struggle into imperialist
wars, and in any case not a fit subject for serious study in its own right since it was
merely a politically convenient conduit of other forces and interests. Franz Borkenau
would rejoin:
In the political field, nationalism is the fact against which the Marxist theory breaks
itself. Here is a force which has proved definitely stronger in the modern world
than the class struggle which for orthodox Marxists makes the essence of history.
The natural result was that the Marxists constantly tended to underestimate a force
which did not easily fit into their ideas, and which at the same time was clearly
contrasted with the ideals of the class-struggle. It became almost a mark of an
orthodox Marxist to despise every nationalist feeling9*
The dismissal of culture, that is, a transmitted historical consciousness, as an aspect of
class consciousness, did not equip the Marxian movement for the political forces that
would not only erupt in Europe and the Third World but within the movement itself.
For many Marxists it would be left to the new ideological and political order instituted by the Bolshevik triumph in the Russian Revolution, and not received theory,
62

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

to sort out a Marxist orthodoxy on the national question. Ultimately the resolution
was a political one clothed only partially by theory. Here we need only to sketch its
politically authoritative form since we will return to more closely inspect its development in Part 111.
Trotsky, though early on committed to the idea that nations had the right to selfd e t e r m i n a t i ~ nwas
, ~ ~ also of the opinion that the "centralizing needs of economic
development" would ultimately lead to the dissolution of the nation-state. "The
nation, divorced from the economy and freed from the old framework of the state,
would have the right to self determination . . . in the sphere of 'cultural development.' "loo Trotsky's formulations seemed to be entirely borrowed first from Marx and
later from Lenin.
Lenin, indeed, seems to have done most to extend Marxist theory on the national
question. Lowy writes:
Lenin understood better than his comrades of the revolutionary left the dialectical
relationship between internationalism and the right of national self-determination.
He understood, firstly, that only the freedom to secede makes possible free and
voluntary union. . . . Secondly, that only the recognition by the workers' movement
in the oppressor nation of the right of the oppressed nation to self-determination
can help to eliminate the hostility and suspicion of the oppressed, and unite the
proletariat of both nations in the international struggle against the bourgeoisie.lO'
Of course, Lenin's prominence as an architect of the October Revolution, as leader of
the Soviet State and a founder of the Third International, gave his opinions the
requisite authority to become dogma. Nevertheless, the complex and rather voluminous character of his writings on the national question left his ideas vulnerable to
simplification. In the course of things, it was Lenin's successor, Stalin, who would
supply the most simple and authoritative proclamations on the national question. In
1913, with the instruction of Lenin, Stalin wrote his now famous pamphlet, Marxism
and the National Question. In his article, Stalin took it upon himself to define a nation
("A nation is a historically evolved, stable community of language, territory, economic
life, and psychological make-up manifested in a community of culture. . . . It is only
when all these characteristics are present that we have a nation.lo2He also declared his
support for the right of national self-determination ("The right of self determination
means that a nation can arrange its life according to its own will. It has the right to
arrange its life on the basis of autonomy. It has the right to enter into federal relations
with other nations. It has the right to complete secession. Nations are sovereign and all
nations are equal.") lo3 It was Stalin's formulae that would dominate discourse on the
national question for at least three decades after Lenin's death. This is particularly
unfortunate since it was precisely during this period that socialist organization and
thought came to the most persistent encounters with the ideology of nationalism.
What the Marxists did not understand about the political and ideological phenomenon of nationalism is that it was not (and is not) a historical aberration (of proletarian internationalism). Nor is it necessarily the contrary: a developmental stage of
SOCIALIST THEORY A N D N A T I O N A L I S M

63

internationalism. Nationalism defeated the Marxism of the Second International
(World War I), but ironically, was a basis of the Marxism of the Third International
(the Russian revolutions; Stalin's socialism in one country; the conditions for membership in the Comintern), yet its primary world-historical significancewas denied. It
remained for most northern Marxists a secondary phenomenon (to the class struggle). As I have indicated, Lenin saw its character as principally political, Luxemburg as
principally cultural. The error resided less in the mythic, analytic, or theoretical
treatments of nationalism, than in "a defective grasp of the overall nature and depth
of capitalist development."lo4
The unforeseeable, antagonistic reality of capitalism's growth into the world is
what the general title "uneven development" refers to. . . .
In the traditional philosophical terminology, this amounts of course to a "contradiction." The contradiction here is that capitalism, even as it spread remorselessly over the world to unite human society into one more or less connected story
for the first time, also engendered a perilous and convulsive new fragmentation of
that society. The socio-historical cost of this rapid implantation of capitalism into
world society was "nationalism." . . .
The world market, world industries and world literature predicted with such
exultation in The Communist Manifesto all conducted, in fact, to the world of
nationalism.lo5
The consequence of the hegemony of capitalism, that is, the social and political
reactions to capitalism, have seldom held to those conjectured by a logic bound by the
laws of "capitalism." It is not that those reactions have been illogical, but that they
have failed to conform to the political economic code emergent from capitalist society. It is this same code that still influences-maintains, as it were-the epistemological boundaries of radical social theory.
It generalizes the economic mode of rationality over the entire expanse of human
history, as the generic mode of human becoming. It circumscribes the entire
history of man in a gigantic simulation model. It tries somehow to turn against the
order of capital by using as an analytic instrument the most subtle ideological
phantasm that capital has itself elaborated.Io6
It is in no way unusual for Marxian thinkers to declare, as Alex Callincos did recently:
"The role of philosophy is that of the theoretical reflection of proletarian class positions."lo7It does not seem to matter that this tradition placed Trotsky and Bukharin in
Brooklyn only weeks before the revolution against Tsarist Russia.lo8We are again
reminded of Engels's warning to the Marxist generation of his last years:
Marx and I are ourselves partly to blame for the fact that the younger people
sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due to it. . . . Unfortunately,
however, it happens only too often that people think they have fully understood a

64

EMERGENCE A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

new theory and can apply it without more ado from the moment they have
mastered its main principles, and even those not always correctly.lo9
This criteria might well have been extended to the more mature, and ultimately more
responsible, members of later generations of Marxists. It would have to be deepened,
however, to fathom the structure of Marxian theory.
With respect to Marxism's failure in determining the historical force and character
of ideology as nationalism, another of Engels's remarks is apropos:
[Olnce an historic element has been brought into the world by other, ultimately
economic causes, it reacts, can react on its environment and even on the causes that
have given rise to it.l1°
Just as the expansion of capitalism has resulted in the preservation of certain aspects
of non- ("pre-") capitalist modes of production, there is also evidence that nationalism in many places has assumed forms largely organized through ideational systems
indigenous to those peoples exploited by the world market. It is not entirely accurate
to argue as Tom Nairn has recently that:
Nationalism defeated socialism in the zone of high development, forcing it outwards into successive areas of backwardness where it was bound to become part of
their great compensatory drive to catch up-an ideology of development or industrialization, rather than one of post-capitalist society.'''
Nairn suggests the transfer of a socialism bred in the historical conditions at the
center of industrial capitalism. This is a socialism capable of changing place without
changing character! However, no single model of socialist industrialization or development has resulted from the revolutionary social orders of the Soviet Union, the
People's Republic of China, Cuba, Vietnam, Kampuchea, Mozambique, or Angola.
That is because each of these revolutionary orders is informed by political, moral, and
ideological presumptions with priorities that precede their envelopment into the
modern world system. Again, it may not be the case that we have seen "the full
historical potential of 'nationalism.' "112
Conclusion

Among the several curious and unhappy legacies in Western civilizations of those
centuries nearest to us are the system of capitalism and the beliefs in rationalism and
science. But perhaps in some sense the term "legacy" is inappropriate, not the least for
its suggestions of fatality, for none of these has passed away. Capitalism, rationalism,
and scientism are not merely forms of activity (production) and reflexives of that
activity. Each became a momentous historical force, providing substantially the character of the present industrial world-its character, but not necessarily its historical
direction. This has been, of course, a frustrating disappointment to some-particu-

SOCIALIST THEORY A N D NATIONALISM

65

larly those who believed that through the movement of capitalism they had discovered the nature, that is, the basis for historical change. For them, perhaps, the
most disturbing social phenomenon of our time has been the "re-emergence" of
ideology-what Marx called partial consciousness-to its prescientific, prerational
prominence in the affairs of humankind. Ideology, especially in the twentieth century,
has come to play a discordant role within the body of modern social thought, somewhat akin to that which slavery assumed among the rationalistic analytical frameworks concomitant to the rise of capitalism. Ideology, simply, is a negation of those
strains of contemporary social inquiry that have become dominant. Its "intrusions"
in our century and the one that preceded it have helped to abort those social and
historical processes believed to be necessary and inevitable; have catalyzed rebellions
and revolutions in often unlikely circumstances and among unlikely peoples; and
have assisted in extraordinary historical achievement where failure was "objectively"
immanent. As an ally of historical forces only poorly understood, ideology has exposed Western thought both in its form as mechanical Marxism for its reductionism,"' and, in an entirely different way, liberal thought for its reifications.l14
The limits of Western radicalism as demonstrated in Marxist theory, the most
sustained critique of the modern era, are endemic to Western civilization. Those
limitations relate directly to the "understanding" of consciousness, and the persistence of racialism in Western thought was of primary importance. It would have
been exceedingly difficult and most unlikely that such a civilization in its ascendancy
as a significant power in the world would produce a tradition of self-examination
sufficiently critical to expose one of its most profound terms of order. Racialism, as I
have tried to show, ran deep in the bowels of Western culture, negating its varying
social relations of production and distorting their inherent contradictions. The comprehension of the particular configuration of racist ideology and Western culture has
to be pursued historically through successive eras of violent domination and social
extraction that directly involved European peoples during the better part of two
millennia. Racialism insinuated not only medieval, feudal, and capitalist social structures, forms of property, and modes of production, but as well the very values and
traditions of consciousness through which the peoples of these ages came to understand their worlds and their experiences. Western culture, constituting the structure
from which European consciousness was appropriated, the structure in which social
identities and perceptions were grounded in the past, transmitted a racialism that
adapted to the political and material exigencies of the moment. In the medieval and
feudal social orders of the European hinterland and the Mediterranean, racialism was
substantiated by specific sets of exploitation through which particular caste or classes
exploited and expropriated disparate peoples.
At the very beginnings of European civilization (meaning literally the reappearance
of urban life at the end of the first Christian millennium), the integration of the
Germanic migrants with older European peoples resulted in a social order of domination from which a racial theory of order emerged; one from which the medieval
nobilities would immerse themselves and their power in fictional histories, positing
66 E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S O F E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

distinct racial origins for rulers and the dominated. The extension of slavery and the
application of racism to non-European peoples as an organizing structure by first the
ruling feudal strata and then the bourgeoisies of the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries retained this practical habit, this social convention. And as we shall
soon see in Part 11, from the seventeenth century on, English merchant capital (to cite
an important example) incorporated African labor in precisely these terms, that is,
the same terms through which it had earlier absorbed Irish labor. Moreover, European racialism was to undergo a kind of doubling onto itself, for in between the era
of intra-European racism that characterized the first appearance of European consciousness and the predatory era of African enslavement, is the almost entirely exogenous phenomenon of Islamic domination of the Mediterranean-the eventual fount
of European revitalization and recivilization. Independent of the historical meshings
of European development but profoundly restricting that development-first in literally retarding European social development by isolating it from civil life, science,
speculative thought, and so on, and then, after four centuries, by accelerating its
recovery from the twelfth century onward-Muslim civilization mapped the contours
of the European cultural renaissance. These events were to leave tell-tale marks on
Western consciousness: the fear and hatred of "blackamoors"; the demonization of
Islam; the transfiguration of Muhammad the Prophet into the anti-Christ. Not surprisingly, Europeans, that is "Christendom:' still experience recurrences of antipathy
toward what became their shared phantasmagoria.
In short, there were at least four distinct moments that must be apprehended in
European racialism; two whose origins are to be found within the dialectic of European development, and two that are not:
1. the racial ordering of European society from its formative period, which extends
into the medieval and feudal ages as "blood and racial beliefs and legends.
2. the Islamic (i.e., Arab, Persian, Turkish, and African) domination of Mediterranean civilization and the consequent retarding of European social and cultural life:
the Dark Ages.
3. the incorporation of African, Asian, and peoples of the New World into the
world system emerging from late feudalism and merchant capitalism.
4. the dialectic of colonialism, plantocratic slavery, and resistance from the sixteenth century forward, and the formations of industrial labor and labor reserves.

It is now a convention to begin the analysis of racism in Western societies with the
third moment; entirely ignoring the first and second and only partially coming to
terms with the fourth. As we shall observe in the next section of this study, the results
have been rather bizarre: some students of racism have happily reiterated the premise
of a sort of mass psychology of chromatic trauma in which European reactions to
darker-skinned peoples are seen as natural; others, including Marxists, have argued
for a simplistic "empiricism" where the inevitable consequences of slavery and domination are the rationalizations of racial superiority and inferiority. In each instance,
the root of the methodological and conceptual flaws is the same: the presumption
SOCIALIST THEORY A N D N A T I O N A L I S M

67

that the social and historical processes that matter, which are determinative, are
European. All else, it seems, is derivative. (On this score the preoccupation of Western
radicalism with capitalism as a system has served the same purpose. Marxists have
often argued that national liberation movements in the Third World are secondary to
the interests of the industrial proletariat in the capitalist metropoles, or that they need
to be understood only as the social efflux of world capitalism. Such movements
require fitting in at the margins of the model for socialist revolution.) What is
least defensible though, is how scant the attention paid to intra-European racialism
has been.
We have now given consideration to the first moment of European racialism; it is
time to explore the other three. This we shall do, but with a difference. History will no
longer be left to revolve around European peoples or to originate from Europe as its
center. In Part 11, in particular respecting African peoples and the African diaspora,
we will explore the foundations of the modern era as they were forged or enhanced by
the activities of other peoples. In focusing on the history of the struggles of Black
peoples for a different social order, we will of course, be reminded again of the
limitations of Western radicalism, but more importantly we shall be preparing ourselves for a more profound understanding of the Black radical tradition. When in
turn we have concluded that preparation, we shall then examine the pioneering
efforts of Black radical theorists. This, too, will provide us with some insight into the
problems of Western radicalism. The basis of Part I11 will be the thought of three
Black ideologists, Du Bois, James, and Wright, who became conscious of their own
positions and that of Black struggles in Western civilization and thought. Their
attempts to reconcile their social consciousness to the priorities of "historical materialism" led to a critique of the very tradition in which they sought relief, and finally
to a radical Black consciousness. Most important, however, is their eventual encounter with the Black radical tradition. The result was the first theoretical articulation of a
revolutionary tradition whose nature was founded on a very different historical role
for consciousness than was anticipated in Western radicalism. The object informing
this study is to synthesize the elements of that emergent Black tradition into a coherent schema so that its remarkable insights and its historical project might assume
their most authentic significance.

68

E M E R G E N C E A N D L I M I T A T I O N S OF E U R O P E A N R A D I C A L I S M

here on the centuries of the modern world's adolescence, and on the formation
and emergence of African peoples.
The Diminution of the Diaspora

Before the African and New World Black liberation movements of the post-Second
World War era, few Western scholars of the African experience had any conception of
the existence of an ideologically based or epistemologically coherent historical tradition of Black radicalism. The presence of such a tradition, the possibilities and conditions of its existence were literally and configuratively alien to these observers. Given
the presumptions these students of Africa and its diaspora made about the bases of
the identities, cultures, ethnicities, and group formations of these various African
peoples, neither space nor time, geography nor periodicity, led them to suspect the
presence of such a tradition. In its stead, these observers reconstructed social and
ideological movements among Blacks to conform to the exigencies of specific locales
and of immediate social causes.' If in their minds such movements occasionallywere
allowed some resemblance to one another, this followed from the fact of a general
racial order shared by most Blacks, whether as slaves or ex-slaves, rather than the
presence of a historical or political consciousness or a social tradition among Blacks.
An ideological connective was presumed remote between the African mutineers on
the Amistad or the captors of the Diane; the maroon settlements in Pernambuco,
Florida, Virginia, Jamaica, the Guianas, and the Carolinas; the slave revolutionists
of the Revolution in Haiti; the slave insurrectionists of the Caribbean and early
nineteenth-century America; the Black rebels of the regions of the Great Fish River,
the Limpopo and the Zambezi in southern Africa; the Black emigrationists of the
American antebellum period; the untolled wars across the African landscape in the
1800s and 1900s; and their twentieth-century successors in Africa and the diaspora.
These events were seen as geographically and historically bounded acts, episodes
connected categorically by the similarity of their sociological elements (e.g., slave or
colonial societies) but evidently unrelated in the sense of any emerging social movement inspired by historical experience and a social ideol~gy.~
Such scholarship, of
course, was either inspired or at least influenced by the ideological requirement that
modern Western thought obliterate the African. As an ideological current, its adherents were not always Europeans. It permeated the intellectual culture and even
compromised the work of some of those Africans' descendants. The pioneering work
of Black scholars such as C. L. R. James and W. E. B. Du Bois was obviously unacceptable to orthodox Anglo-American scholastic e~tablishment.~
The difference was not one of interpretation but comprehension. The makings of
an essentially African response, strewn across the physical and temporal terrain of
societies conceived in Western civilization, have been too infrequently distinguished.
Only over time has the setting for these events been integrated into the tradition. The
social cauldron of Black radicalism is Western society. Western society, however, has
been its location and its objective condition but not-except in a most perverse
72

ROOTS OF BLACK R A D I C A L I S M

fashion-its specific inspiration. Black radicalism is a negation of Western civilization, but not in the direct sense of a simple dialectical negation. It is certain that the
evolving tradition of Black radicalism owes its peculiar moment to the historical
interdiction of African life by European agents. In this sense, the African experience
of the past five centuries is simply one element in the mesh of European history: some
of the objective requirements for Europe's industrial development were met by the
physical and mental exploitation of Asian, African, and native American peoples.
This experience, though, was merely the condition for Black radicalism-its immediate reason for and object of being-but not the foundation for its nature or character.
Black radicalism, consequently, cannot be understood within the particular context
ofits genesis. It is not a variant of Western radicalism whose proponents happen to be
Black. Rather, it is a specifically African response to an oppression emergent from the
immediate determinants of European development in the modern era and framed by
orders of human exploitation woven into the interstices of European social life from
the inception of Western civilization:
[Tlhe similarity of African survivals in the New World points not to tribal peculiarities but to the essential oneness of African culture. That culture was the shield
which frustrated the efforts of Europeans to dehumanize Africans through servitude. The slave may have appeared in a profit and loss account as an "item," and
"thing," a piece of "property," but he faced his new situation as an African, a
worker, and a man. At this level of perception, it is quite irrelevant to enquire from
which tribe or region a particular African ~riginated.~
As we shall see, in slave society such a signification of African culture was accessible
for practical and ideological reasons only in a most grotesque form, that is, racism.
Racist ideologues observed that all Blacks were identical and supplied the content
of that identity. More important, though, few of the proponents of the philosophical, epistemological, or historical traditions of Western culture have found the authentic reality easy to grasp. For longer than the African slave trades to the old or new
worlds, the Eurocentric traditions of Western civilization have categorically erred.
And though he appeared rather late in this process, Hegel, perhaps somewhat crudely,
spoke for these traditions when he declared, "The true theatre of History is therefore
the temperate zone"; and further:
The peculiarly African character is difficult to comprehend, for the very reason that
in reference to it, we must quite give up the principle which naturally accompanies
all our ideas-the category of Universality. . . . Another characteristic fact in reference to the Negroes is Slavery. Negroes are enslaved by Europeans and sold to
America. Bad as this may be, their lot in their own land is even worse, since there a
slavery quite as absolute exists; for it is the essential principle of slavery, that man
has not yet attained a consciousness of his freedom, and consequently sinks down
to a mere Thing-an object of no value. . . .
At this point we leave Africa, not to mention it again. For it is no historical part
PROCESS A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S O F AFRICA'S T R A N S M U T A T I O N

73

of the World; it has no movement or development to exhibit. Historical movements in it-that is in its northern part-belong to the Asiatic or European W ~ r l d . ~
Except, perhaps, in its form of expression, the Eurocentrism that Hegel displays in
these passages has proven to be neither anachronistic nor idiosyncratic. He would be
echoed by legions of European scholars (and their non-European epigony) in a
myriad of ways into the present century.The tradition persisted and permutated.
Such was the character of the world consciousness that dominated thought in
Western Europe. Its origins, as we have seen in Part I, were intra-European rather
than a reflex of encounters between Europeans and non-Europeans. Indeed, the
social base to which this conception was a response assumed its sociological forms
more than a millennium before the advent of an extensive European trade in African
.~
workers and they were not easily displaced even by the eighteenth c e n t ~ r yThis
cultural tradition of a moral and social order that rested on racial distinctions was
nevertheless readily available for the extension to Asian, African, and other nonEuropean peoples when it became appropriate. With respect to the African, that
occasion presented itself in the trade that saw its most bountiful fruition in the
New World.
The Primary Colors of
American Historical Thought

In the summer of 1856, the pro-slavery apologist's argument for the inferiority of
African peoples was most eloquently summarized in an article appearing in the
fledgling but prestigious American literary magazine, Putnam's Monthly:
The most minute and the most careful researches have, as yet, failed to discover a
history or any knowledge of ancient times among the negro races. They have
invented no writing; not even the rude picture-writing of the lowest tribes. They
have no gods and no heroes; no epic poem and no legend, not even simple traditions. There never existed among them an organized government; there never
ruled a hierarchy or an established church. Might alone is right. They have never
known the arts; they are ignorant even of agriculture. The cities of Africa are vast
accumulations of huts and hovels; clay walls or thorny hedges surround them, and
pools of blood and rows of skulls adorn their best houses. The few evidences of
splendour or civilization are all borrowed from Europe; where there is a religion or
creed, it is that of the foreigners; all knowledge, all custom, all progress has come to
them from abroad. The negro has no history-he makes no h i ~ t o r y . ~
This anonymous writer's tortuously comprehensive characterization of the history
and social integrity of Black peoples had appeared in print midway between two
desperate acts in American history: the enactment of the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850 by
a Congress panicked into legislating martial law to defend slavery as a property right,
and the desperate resoluteness of John Brown's final bloody and radical blow against
74 R O O T S O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

slavery in 1859.~It was not, however, some sort of mathematical mean between the
political sentiments, economic interests, and moral consciousness that inspired these
two mutually contradictory but historically complementary public acts (each in its
own way, of course, proved to be a necessary condition for the Civil War that followed). The division of opinion among whites and the European immigrant (who
perhaps too would be "white" someday) could not be neatly correlated in arrangements of paired and equivalent moral postures: Black inferioritylpro-slavery; Black
equalitylanti-slavery. On the contrary, this confident declaration from the bleached
bowels of mid-nineteenth-century American intelligentsia, wrenching history and
historical consciousness from Black peoples, was the dominant ideological rationalization of racial oppression in the United States.loIts arrogant and specious historiography, itself the immediate and mangled product of 300 years of systemic African
slavery in the New World, was both an absolute imperative as a cornerstone for the
rationalization of a slave societyl1and a logical development of an errant civilization
served so long by racial orders. By the middle of the nineteenth century, Western
civilization, both at the strata of intellectual and scientificthought and that of popular
opinion and mythology, had effectively sealed the African past.'* The undercurrent
that gave some recognition to the African's and the Black slave's humanity, and that
had been used to nurture much of the earliest anti-slavery sentiment and literature, had been overwhelmed by the more constant and morally profound tradition
of racism.13
The denial of the African's social order and history was not simply a question of
Europe's or colonial America's ignorance of Africa. David Brion Davis, while reconstructing the descent of the African's image in eighteenth-century European thought,
has sifted through materials that indicate that at least in this instance knowledge had
not been c~mulative:'~
It was known two centuries ago that Negroes lived in settled, agriculture societies;
that they cultivated a variety of crops, raised large herds of cattle, and planted
groves of shade trees. It was known that they were highly skilled in the use of iron
and copper, in the making of jewelry and pottery, and in the weaving of fine cotton
textiles.
. . . It was known that Africans lived in neat and spacious villages which allowed
privacy to the individual while preserving an intricate system of class and family
distinctions. . . . Numerous books told of the Negroes' polite manners, their wellestablished patterns of trade, their knowledge of the planets and constellation^.^^
European travelers and tradesmen, their lives and fortunes so often dependent upon
practical knowledge of African peoples, had frequently published such informed
accounts, detailing social relations with which they had become familiar. Why such
understanding had not persisted in European thought, Davis is at a loss to explain.
Having come to the proposition that slavery had always been problematic to Western
culture,16 Davis, like Jordan,17resorted to mystery: "For reasons that can perhaps
never be fully explained, it was the African's colour of skin that became his defining
PROCESS A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S OF A F R I C A ' S T R A N S M U T A T I O N

71

characteristic, and aroused the deepest response in Europeans."18 Davis in conforming to racial convention has inherited its tautology: racial distinctions are the basis
of racial sensibilities. He would have been better served by a less presumptuous inquiry into the ideological traditions resident in Western history. Then he might have
realized that after some centuries of racial indulgences the substratum of Western
thought was unprepared for anything else. Even the shift in eighteenth-century and
nineteenth-century Western thought from a basis of a religious and philosophical
epistemologyto that of modern science had made little difference.19In point of fact, it
had merely served to extend the terms and rationales for the fantasy of racial inferiority (for the Jews, Irish, Slavs, and Asians as well as for Blacks).20Western scientific thought simply took its place as the latest formal grammar for the expression of a
racial metaphysics to which its most natural response was acquiescence. Indeed,
during much of the nineteenth century, one of the most persistent projects for which
Western science was employed was the attempt to demonstrate what was already
understood to be the natural order of the races.21
In America, the accommodation of Western historical consciousness to racial ideologies created a particular chain of social misperceptions and historical distortions
that endured into the present century. Not only was popular thought affected but
the very foundations of that American academic thought which first began to mature
in the nineteenth century was suffused with racialist presumptions. The emerging
American bourgeoisie, in its mercantile, manufacturing, and plantocratic aspects,
was purposefully and progressively achieving its first stages of ideological coherence.
This intellectual grounding came to absorb the past of those peopling America as well
as their present. The result was the construction of the historical legends that obscured the origins and character of the republic and the social relations upon which it
rested.22The hard edges of class divisions, rooted in the European socioeconomic
traditions of English gentry and continental European aristocracies and their lower
classes, were softened and obscured by a mythical racial unity. The existence of landrich elites, the social and political prerogatives of mercantile capital and agrarian
property, even the genesis of a southern American aristocracy, all this was inundated
by paeans to the political enlightenment that-culling from Europe the "best" of
its moral traditions-had presumably conducted the people to independence, constructed near-perfect instruments of governance, and provided to the individual
rights guaranteed by formal legal codes.23Even the long, vociferous, and sometimes
violent opposition of "American Democracy" (the Democratic Party that had dominated federal policy and federal offices in the second quarter of the nineteenth century) to social democracy or "mob rule" (to its opponents)-both symptomatic of the
truer character of the social order and one of its last overt manifestations-was faded
and forgotten in the wake of an emergent racial consensus.24John Brown, closer to
the artisanal origins associated with English working-class radicalism a quarter of a
century earlier, was a suggestion of a certain strata not entirely mesmerized by the still
novel variant of Western hierarchical systems.
One could discern the character and direction of historical distortion much earlier
76 R O O T S O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

of course. Some of the realities of colonial America were hardly the stuff from which
national legend could be easily formed. By the eighteenth century, American ideologists, already exempted by colonial victory, pacification and an established slave
system from the challenges of the non-Western peoples their narratives would abuse,
had begun to construct alternative realities. It would be some time before their
machinations were no longer tolerable fictions. More recently, while reviewing these
beginnings, Edmund Morgan, reconstructing the relations of the earliest Virginian
colonists with native peoples, summarized the collective psychic state that he felt
must have accompanied the cycle of atrocities that would extend ultimately into the
present century:
If you were a colonist, you knew that your technology was superior to the Indians'.
You knew that you were civilized, and they were savages. It was evident in your
firearms, your clothing, your housing, your government, your religion. The Indians were supposed to be overcome with admiration and to join you in extracting
riches from the country. But your superior technology had proved insufficient to
extract anything. The Indians, keeping to themselves, laughed at your superior
methods and lived from the land more abundantly and with less labor than you
did. They even furnished you with the food that you somehow did not get around
to growing enough of yourselves. To be thus condescended to by heathen savages
was intolerable. And when your own people started deserting in order to live with
them, it was too much. . . . So you killed the Indians, tortured them, burned their
villages, burned their cornfields. It proved your s ~ p e r i o r i t y . ~ ~
Yet as early as 1751, Benjamin Franklin, a most deliberate ruling-class colonial intellectual whose ultimate influence on American society would be vast in ideological,
financial, and territorial terms, was already immersed in a quite different record of
these relationships:
The Europeans found America as fully settled as it well could be by Hunters; yet
these having large Tracks, were easily prevailed on to part with Portions of Territory to the new Comers, who did not much interfere with the Natives in Hunting,
and furnish'd them with many Things they wanted.2h
The violent event of colonial aggression and its corollary of "Indian" slavery had
already been transmuted in Franklin's neo-nativistic "American" mind into a relationship of supplication secured by an economic rationale; indeed, the dependence of
"new Comers" on natives already reversed. The curtain of supremacist ideology had
by now begun its descent on American thought, obscuring from the historically
unconscious generations of descendants of colonialists and later immigrants the
oppressive violence and exploitation interwoven in the structure of the republic.
The emigrant indentured servant, whose origins were most frequently and casually
traced to England, was another of the labor forces upon which the colonial settlements of the seventeenth century depended. They would fare little better than
the native American in the traditions being shaped in American historiography by
PROCESS A N D CONSEQUENCES O F AFRICA'S T R A N S M U T A T I O N

77

ruling-class ideologues. Of course, it is now generally presumed that the "white
servant" as a class had soon disappeared in the English mainland colonies as a result
of the trade in African workers that had begun to reach substantial numbers beginning in the late seventeenth century.27 This, however, was not the case. Richard
Hofstadter tells us: " 'The labor of the colonies,' said Benjamin Franklin in 1759, 'is
performed chiefly by indentured servants brought from Great Britain, Ireland, and
Germany, because the high price it bears cannot be performed in any other way.' "28
And as late as the years immediate to the American Revolution, servants still constituted approximately lo percent of the two and one-half million people occupying
the rebellious colonies. Like the slave, legally chattel to be sold at the discretion of a
master, often the subject of cruel punishments, and without the rights to property, to
marry without the permission of the master, or to drink in a public tavern, the white
servant joined the vast excluded majority of the young republic's p o p ~ l a t i o n : ~ ~
Had Lockean dicta been applied to all the human beings in British North America
on the eve of the Revolution, and had all been permitted to enjoy the natural and
legal rights of freemen, it would have been necessary to alter the status of more than
85 per cent of the population. In law and in fact no more than 15 per cent of the
Revolutionary generation was free to enjoy life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness unhampered by any restraints except those to which they had given their
consent.
The unfree of Revolutionary America may be conveniently considered in five
categories: Negroes, white servants, women, minors, and propertyless adult white
males.30
The privileges of democracy were illusory for most.31White servants themselves were
no closer to liberation at the end of the eighteenth century than were their distracted
predecessors who had joined with the rankly ambitious Indian-killer Bacon in a
desperate attempt to redraw the boundaries of power and wealth of colonial society in
the seventeenth century.32Nevertheless, the tragic experiences of these generations of
working poor were seldom transliterated into heroic saga. Even Abbot E. Smith,
whose studies would prove to be so important to the reclamation of this class's
historical role, found that an appropriate instrument was difficult to construct. While
he fiddled with the calculation that the actual importance of the servant class to those
who organized the settlements might be measured by their proportions of the colonial populations (indentured servants amounted to "at least half, and perhaps twothirds, of all immigrants to the colonies south of New Y ~ r k " ) Smith
, ~ ~ would ultimately insist in bemused concord with his less than objective primary sources that
such a measure was finally inflationary:
[Mlodern writers have generally viewed them with generous tolerance, and magnified their virtues either out of patriotic pride or out of a wish to demonstrate how
grievously worthy persons were exploited by economic overlords in the bad old

78 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

days. But almost with one accord their own contemporaries, who knew them and
saw them, denounced them as next to worthless.
. . . [A]fter making due allowances for middle-class arrogance and the necessities
of argument, there cannot remain the slightest doubt that in the eyes of contemporaries, indentured white servants were much more idle, irresponsible, unhealthy
and immoral than the generality of good English laborers. Common sense, without evidence, would in fact indicate much the same thing.34
Smith would have little of this "tolerance" for the servant class. Nor would Hofstadter. White servitude was a gathering of the inevitable effluence of "casual workers,
lumper-proletarians, and criminals" of an England characterized by Hofstadter as a
"backward economy . . . moving toward more modern methods in industry and
agri~ulture."~~
Only vaguely understood was the fact that white servants, held to be
virtually silent on their experiences by the majority of American historian^,^^ were
drawn from those redundant sectors of English and continental European societies
whose economic and political displacements constituted the basis for the judgment of
"overpopulation." Even quite good historians could be smitten by the ideological
prerogatives of their class predecessors.
As might be expected, the white servant class drew to itself the social categories that
had long been a basic currency for Western culture. Smith recorded the points of
observation of the contemporaries of these "white" servants. He noted the attempts
made to characterize the colonial lower class in racial and national terms:37
Franklin said the Germans were stupid. . . . Rarely was any criticism levelled against
the Scots. . . . Even though they had been rebels or vagabonds at home, they were
looked upon as universally ambitious, industrious, and intelligent. . . . Irish were
least favored, and some colonies taxed or even forbade their importation. This was
partly because of their religion, which was held to be politically dangerous, but
mainly because of their tendency to be idle and to run away. [Christopher] Jefferson wrote that many of them were "good for nothing but mischief"; we read that
they "straggled" in Bermuda, that they rioted in Barbados, that they would never
settle down to an obedient servitude, satisfactory to their masters. Welsh were
highly esteemed.38
Smith's inventory, however, was far from complete. It was, as well, somewhat deceptive, since neither the Welsh nor the Scots were as numerous as the Irish or Germans
among seventeenth- and eighteenth-century immigrant^.^^ Not surprisingly, given
the history of Ireland since the sixteenth century, the Irish were the primary source of
indentured and forced immigrants. In the eighteenth century, for example, perhaps
as many as lo,ooo men, women, and children were "transported" from Ireland to the
New World as convicts.40And again between 1745 and 1775, according to the Naval
Officer's Returns for the Maryland port of Annapolis, 5,835 servants emigrated from
Ireland compared to a total for Great Britain (London, Bristol, and "other ports") of

PROCESS A N D C O N S E Q U E N C E S O F AFRICA'S T R A N S M U T A T I O N

79

4,725, some of whom were doubtlessly Irish.41As significant as the numbers, is the
role that the colonization of Ireland had played in the development of English colonization of the New World:
The adventurers to Ireland claimed that their primary purpose was to reform the
Irish and . . . "to reduce that countrey to civilitie and the maners of England." It is
evident, however, that no determined effort was ever made to reform the Irish, but
rather that at the least pretext-generally resistance to the English-they were
dismissed as a "wicked and faythles peopoll" and put to the sword. This formula
was repeated in the treatment of the Indians in the New World. . . . We also find the
same indictments being brought against the Indians, and later the blacks, in the
New World that had been brought against the Irish. It was argued that the Indians
were an unsettled people who did not make proper use of their land and thus could
be justly deprived of it by the more enterprising English. Both Indians and blacks,
like the Irish, were accused of being idle, lazy, dirty, and licentious, but few serious
efforts were made to draw any of them from their supposed state of d e g e n e r a ~ y . ~ ~
The Irish were, then, the prototype for the white servant. And as their own impressive
numbers were increased, and the servant class augmented by immigrants from Germany and other refugees from the political upsets of European society and their
socioeconomic aftershocks in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the vise
of intra-European racialism, religious oppression, and class contempts was lifted to
embrace most of them.43This enveloping racial social order was an ideological accommodation for ignoring or obfuscating the real origins and the more authentic
categories of the developing white working class. If they were poor, it was because
they had been victims of massive thefts by states and ruling classes; if they were rude
and unruly, it was a consequence of the wholesale violations to which they had been
subject. Little of this was ideologically convenient when it was comprehended by that
infinitesimally small colonial capitalist class that was to use them as laborers, as buffer
settlements at the frontiers, or as instruments of discipline for the African populations. It was enough to know that they were "the middling and the poor that emigrated," as Crkvecoeur put it.44That, of course, was the barest outline of the tale.
By the eighteenth century, the racial mist of European civilization had settled over
the social topography of the English colonies, its blanket scattering the realities of
domination and remixing their elements into familiar hues. However, in the lower
orders, where the mist was thickest and where received wisdom has taught us to
expect Blackness, the contemporary spectrum was more complex: the natives of the
New World obtained a savage red, European labor a mottled gray. Above their heads it
was a simpler matter: the ruling classes stood in dramatic, white relief. But between
ourselves and the specter of that American past are the historical and racial fables that
obscure the related exploitations and oppressions of African, European, Asian, and
Amerindian peoples during the intervening 200 years. As a means of obliterating
these events, the myth of white solidarity arose and came to dominate American

80

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

The triangular trade . . . gave a triple stimulus to British industry. The Negroes were
purchased with British manufactures; transported to the plantations, they produced sugar, cotton, indigo, molasses and other tropical products, the processing
of which created new industries in England; while the maintenance of the Negroes
and their owners on the plantations provided another market for British industry,
New England agriculture and the Newfoundland fisheries. By 1750 there was hardly
a trading or a manufacturing town in England which was not in some way connected with the triangular or direct colonial trade. The profits obtained provided
one of the main streams of that accumulation of capital in England which financed
the Industrial R e v o l ~ t i o n . ~ ~
Still England was not alone, nor the English unique in having arrived at a point where
the appearance of representatives of the "Negro race" was convenient. One simple
measure of the importance of African labor that lay behind the construction of this
creature is that "before the nineteenth century. . . for 300 years more Africans than
Europeans crossed the Atlantic each year."52 Only the accumulated interests and
mercantile activities of the ruling classes and bourgeoisies of Portugal, Spain, France,
Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, and Britain could have accomplished such a massive
scale of exploitation.
This "Negro" was a wholly distinct ideological construct from those images of
Africans that had preceded it. It differed in function and ultimately in kind. Where
previously the Blacks were a fearful phenomenon to Europeans because of their
historical association with civilizations superior, dominant, and/or antagonistic to
Western societies (the most recent being that of Islam), now the ideograph of Blacks
came to signify a difference of species, an exploitable source of energy (labor power)
both mindless to the organizational requirements of production and insensitive to
the subhuman conditions of work. In the more than 3,000 years between the beginnings of the first conception of the "Ethiopian" and the appearance of the "Negro,"
the relationship between the African and European had been reversed.
Premodern Relations between
Africa and Europe

Because one's sense of the past is so often conceptually distorted by a consciousness
whose natural world of things and relationships is the present, it is important to recall
that the collisions of the Black and white "races" began long before the events of the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries that prefigured modern African slavery.53The obliteration of the African past from European consciousness was the culmination of a
process a thousand years long and one at the root of European historical identity.
More than a millennium before the beginning of the Christian era, civilizations of
the eastern and northern Mediterranean had encountered at least one of the "high
civilizations" of Africa.

82

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

The Mediterranean:
Egypt, Greece, and Rome

Ancient Egypt was a land primarily of peasants and farmers whose chief preoccupations centered on the Nile's beneficence. It appears quite likely that the state emerged
as a direct result of the administrative requirements involved in planning and controlling the waters the Nile brought or did not bring during its periods of inundation.
Reservoirs, dikes, canals, and dams became the means of preserving the land during
the frequent periods of drought. Once institutionalized, the state became the basis of
the first world system, extending Egyptian civilization down the Nile into eastern
and northern Mediterranean lands.54As early as the Egyptian nineteenth dynasty
(1320-1200 B.c.) the Lukku (Lycians),and Teresh (Tarsians) and the Akaiawasha (the
Achaeans), as either mercenaries or allies of the Hittites (and most probably the
former) had been recorded on the stele of Merneptah (1236-23 B.c.) as among the
enemies of Egypt which he had defeated.55Greek traditions themselves speak of the
founding of Egyptian colonies (Attica, Argolis) in Greece in the fifteenth and fourteenth centuries.56Seven hundred years passed before the historical evidence as it is
presently preserved reveals another encounter. In the seventh and sixth centuries B.c.,
Ionian and Carian mercenaries served the Pharaohs Psamtik I (663-609 B.c.) and
Psamtik I1 (594-88 B . c . ) .Among
~~
other duties, they were used to man the garrison at
the Pelusian Daphnae (now the western Sinai), and along with Greek merchant
traders encouraged to settle at Naucratis near the capital of Sais in the western Nile
delta. The settlement of Greeks at Naucratis is interesting, since before this time they
had been forbidden residence in Egypt. This dependence on foreign mercenaries to
defend its borders was one symptom of the weakness of an Egyptian state that would
succumb to the Assyrians less than half a century later.58In the fifth century B.c.,
Herodotus, the first of Europe's historians, traced Egyptian colonial settlements as far
as the northern Black Sea region. Herodotus described a Black people, the Colchians
("they are black skinned and have woolly hair")59living in what at present is Soviet
Georgia. Herodotus believed that the Colchians were descendants of an Egyptian
army under "King Sesostris" (believed to be a composite of Sety I, UU-1301 B.c., and
Rameses 11, 1301-1234 B . C . ) .He
~ ~also noted the participation of Ethiopian soldiers
under Xerxes in the Persian wars.61Herodotus' references to Black peoples may be
taken quite literally since his Egyptian travels (around 440 B.c.) took him up the Nile
as far as Elephantine (an island opposite modern Aswan), fully acquainting him with
the people whom he called Ethiopians.
From the pre-Christian seventh century on, Egyptian law, science, religion, and
philosophy began to have dramatic impacts on the development of Ionian and Greek
The Egyptian Mysteries, expelled from Greece 300 or 400 years earlier in
the struggle against Egyptian imperialism, once again became the basis of Greek
development. Now the spoils of a crumbling state, this time the Mysteries served to
advance intellectual and scientific development rather than a technology extended for

PROCESS A N D CONSEQUENCES OF AFRICA'S T R A N S M U T A T I O N

83

also assumed relations with African peoples of northwestern Africa (that is Libya and
west of Libya) and as far south as Cameroon and the Sudan.69As the Greeks had in
Egypt, the Romans found in north Africa peoples such as the Garamantes who were
Black or mixed. (Evidence found in Cyprus of an earlier period, the sixth century B.C.
tends to confirm the role of Blacks in even late Egyptian history.)7uThe Romans had
as well encountered Black soldiers in the army of Hannibal the Carthaginian, which
invaded Europe in 218 B.C. The Romans are also known to have sent military expeditions and to have established military posts and diplomatic relations among peoples
south of Egypt. These efforts were in keeping with the attempt to secure the southern
boundaries of their Egyptian colony and to preserve trade routes to Meroe, the
eastern desert, and central Africa.71Peace, however, was elusive, as evidenced by the
successive wars fought against the armies of the Ethiopian queen Candace during the
last third of the first century B.C. In addition, an Ethiopian people, the Blemmyes,
fought continuous wars with Roman armies from 250 A.D. to 545 A . D . ' ~ West of the
Egyptian delta, Roman military expeditions in 86 A.D. and a few years later may have
penetrated as far as Lake Chad.73 The purpose seems to have been primarily the
defense of trade routes and caravans, though joint efforts with the Garamantes may
have related directly to the state interests of Rome's African allies. Yet despite their less
than cordial relations with Africans, the Romans, like their Greek predecessors, did
not evolve prejudices of color and race:
[Slocial intercourse did not give rise among the Greeks and Romans to the color
prejudice of certain later western societies. The Greeks and Romans developed no
doctrines of white superiority unsupported by facts or theoretical justifications for
a color bar.
The presence of large numbers of Negroes in a white society, according to some
modern views, gives rise to anti-Negro feeling. Ethiopians were far from rare sights
in the Greco-Roman, particularly the Roman, world. Yet the intense color prejudice of the modern world was lacking. Although it is impossible to estimate the
Negro element in the classical world in terms of precise statistics, it is obvious
that the Black population in Greece and Italy was larger than has been generally
realized.74

The Dark Ages: Europe and Africa

After the dissolution of Roman administration, in the fifth century A.D., knowledge of
either the ancient African period or of more contemporary periods, began to dissipate dramatically among European peoples. For Europeans beyond the Mediterranean it had never been extensive in any case, restricted largely to those privy to state
affairs and those few engaged in the quite sparse literary traditions. In western Europe, its peoples isolated from the centers of civilization by geography, the rigors of
transhumance and resettlement, the absence of urban centers, and the lateness of
their development, the subsequent dominance of the Mediterranean area by Muslim
PROCESS A N D CONSEQUENCES OF AFRICA'S TRANSMUTATION

85

peoples proved to be catastrophic for their knowledge of peoples beyond the eastern
fringes of the European peninsula. As one example, in the mid-thirteenth century,
Bartholomew Anglicus observed with unjustifiable certainty:
Ethiopia, blue men's land, had first that name of color of men. For the sun is nigh
and roasteth and toasteth them. And so the color of men showeth the strength of
the star, for there is considerable heat. . . . In this land be many nations with divers
faces wonderly and horribly shaper. There be two Ethiopias, one in the East and the
other is Mauretania in the West, and that is more near Spain. And then is Numidia
and the Province of Carthage. Then is Getula, and at last against the course of the
sun is the land that is hight Ethiopia Adusta, burnt, and fables tell that there
beyond the Antipodes men that have their feet against our feet.75
The ancient civilizations of the Old World, in Asia as well as Africa, became
legends, preserved most constantly in the obscure and recondite histories of biblical
narrative. As knowledge became more and more a monastic preserve, secular reconstructions assumed a certain rarity due to the church's commitment to the interpretation of history in accord with its perceptions of divine
Ethnocentrism, legitimated by the authorities of church and ignorance, the two fountains of medieval
knowledge, became the basis for world knowledge. Ultimately, with the evolution of
Christian ideology into a worldview, it was enough to know that mankind was
divisible into two collectivities: the army of Light and the army of Darkness:
Whether men wrote of an imperium christianum, a regnum Europae, or later of a
societal christiana, there was the same impulse to separate the known securities of
the "inside" from the dark and threatening forces of paganism, heresy, and schism
which lay beyond the ~erimeter.'~
Europe was God's world, the focus of divine attention; the rest of mankind belonged
for the moment to Satan. For perhaps a thousand years or more, western European
world historical consciousness was transformed into theosophy, demonology, and
mythology.78And, indeed, in a most profound sense European notions of history,
both theological and pseudo-theological, negated the possibility of the true existence
of earlier civilizations. The perfectability of mankind, the eschatological vision, precluded the possibility of pre-Christian civilization having achieved any remarkable
development in moral law, social organization, or natural history (science). For 600
years more, Cassiodorus' sixth-century prescription for putting "the devil and his
work to flight" held sway over medieval education and knowledge:
Let us who sincerely long to enter heaven through intellectual exertions believe that
God disposes all things in accordance with his will, and let us . . . reject and
condemn the vanities of the present life and carefully investigate the books of the
Divine Scriptures in their normal order, so that by referring all things to the glory
of the Creator we may profitably assign to the celestial mysteries that which those
men have seemed to seek vainly for the sake of mortal praise. And, therefore, as the
86 R O O T S O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

blessed Augustine and other very learned Fathers say, secular writings should not
be spurned. It is proper, however, as the Scripture states, to "meditate in the
(divine) law day and night," for, though a worthy knowledge of some matters is
occasionally obtained from secular writings, this law is the source of eternal life.79
Islam, Africa, and Europe

Ironically, south of the Pyrenees, encircling the Mediterranean extending beyond the
Indus, the scholars among the figurative descendants of the prophet Abraham's first
son, Ishmael, were becoming the direct heirs of ancient learning and thought. Lerner
and Mahdi argue that this was made possible by the fact that in Islam the absorption
of "new and alien sciences" was a juridical rather than a theological question and was
thus resolved by the dispute of advocates before a jurist. The issue was whether or not
these sciences interfered with beliefs prescribed by Law as defined by jurists. There
was too, they note, an absence of ecclesiastical authority in Islam; an authority that
might well have paralleled the medieval Christian Church in its preoccupation with
competing "heresies."80Rodinson believes that perhaps even more significant was the
ethos of Arab culture:
Arab customs accepted and encouraged the adoption, by every clan, of people of all
kinds and every nationality, who then became wholly Arab. . . . Persians, Syrians,
Egyptians, Berbers, Goths, Greeks and a host of others joined the Arabs, considered themselves as Arabs and really became Arabs. But still greater numbers became M ~ s l i m s . ~ ~
While the spiritual and most often the temporal authorities of Christendom shunned
much of the learning amassed by pre-Christian civilizations, the Arabic-speaking
scholars took to this knowledge as a legitimate booty of the wars won by Muslim
armies. Arabic culture now began the absorption of the more developed scientific and
philosophic thought of the defeated, just as earlier, the Persian and Syriac cultures
had absorbed like elements of Greek culture once it was finally proscribed officially in
the Christian Rome of the sixth century, and the Greeks before them took to the
intellectual produce of Egyptian and Babylonian cultures.
Protected and facilitated by the expansion of Islamic states, Arabic scholars between the seventh and tenth centuries achieved access to the works of their Mediterranean predecessors. The most intensive period of translation into the Arabic from
~~
Greek, Sanskrit, Persian, and Syriac took place between 750 and 900 A . D .Translations, however, appear to have been selective, since historical works were generally
neglected during the earliest period of absorption. Translators, tending toward a
predominance of physicians, demonstrated interests that generally attended to works
in the fields of medicine, mathematics, and astronomy.
In the Islamic east, the artistic and intellectual center would gravitate from Damascus and Baghdad to Cairo, as the toll from incursions by Seljuq Turks, Christian
Crusaders, Berbers, Arab nomads, and Mongol armies mounted. In the west, the alPROCESS A N D CONSEQUENCES OF AFRICA'S T R A N S M U T A T I O N

87

Maghrib, the most glorious centers of Islamic culture were to be found on the Iberian
peninsula. It was in Spain and particularly Toledo (reacquired by "Christendom" in
1085 after more than 300 years of Muslim rule) that the work of translation was
concentrated. In the twelfth century, following closely the eleventh-century translations, from Arabic to Latin, of Constantine the African (d. 1087) of medical writings,
European scholars came face to face with the knowledge of the ancient world's
philosophy, physics, mathematics, medicine, alchemy, and astronomy for the first
time in almost 1,000years:
At the beginning of the twelfth century, Greek knowledge was available in Greek
and in Arabic, but more accessible in the latter form. Moreover, many Greek works
were lost in the original but available in Arabic translations. When the West became sufficiently mature to feel the need for deeper knowledge, when it wanted to
renew its contacts with ancient thought, it turned to Arabic sources.
Thus the main intellectual task of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries was one of
translation. Much of the intellectual energy of medieval times was spent not in the
creation of new intellectual values but in the transmission of older ones. Knowledge was won not by fresh and independent investigation but by translation,
chiefly from Arabic.83
By the end of the twelfth century, the universities of Salerno and Bologna in Italy,
Paris and Montpellier in France, and Oxford (and in the thirteenth century, Cambridge) in England had been founded on this quite extraordinary event.R4
Islamic civilization, however, did more than simply function as a belated conduit in
the development of Western civilization. Northern Africa as the end point to the gold
trade with West Africa was systematically proscribed to European merchants. The
purpose, apparently, was to maintain the secret of the sources of the mines and the
trans-Saharan routes of trade. In the tenth century, however, the Arab traders began
the extraction of a more variable wealth: slaves. Utilizing ports on the Red Sea coast,
over the next goo years, Arab slave traders plundered African societies for perhaps as
many as 17 million people.85
That, however, is another story, perhaps another history. More to the point is the
drawing of the following historical schemata that traduces some of the more consequential effects of Islamic civilization on European peoples, their histories, and their
institutions. What is compelling, of course, is that the impact of Islam on Europeans
goes far beyond the accepted lore of Muslim civilization as a "treasury for ancient
knowledge." This was but an important petard. A much greater force confronted
European destiny.
It was not as the descendants of legendary Hebrews or as the vessels of ancient
knowledge that Muslims came to be most frequently represented among European
peoples. Islam, a faith that embraced a multiracial civilization incorporating peoples
from Arabia, Africa, the Near East, the East, and southern Europe, would be known
by its armies. And Africans were prominent in its armies from the very beginning.
Africans had fought in the pre-Islamic Arabian wars, and within the first century of
88

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

the Islamic era (the Christian seventh century), their presence had already been noted
in the empires of E ~ r o p eFour
. ~ ~ hundred years later, when Christendom launched a
furious counterassault against the enemy whose very being mocked the beliefs of
Europe and materially diminished its daily life, Islam, and "blackamoors," was a
familiar identity. The Christian encounter with Islam would have then both racial and
economic resonances.
On account of their logistical appetites, the Christian Crusades, beginning in the
eleventh century against the Saracens in Jerusalem, brought to fruition the mercantile
Italian city-states of the Middle Age. These entrepbts dominated southern and western European commerce with the non-European world until the middle of the fourteenth century.87By the beginnings of that century, though Papal and regal levies for
crusades increased in number and frequency, actual crusades had almost entirely
ended. Once the religious enthusiasm and fanatickm that clothed the carnage of the
crusades had abated, and the ambitions of Norman and Frankish feudal lords and
their clerical allies had been satiated or overwhelmed by the weight of bureaucratic
administrations and the seductions of corruption, the sea trade of the Italian coastal
states turned from the merchandising of war, the conveyance of armies, and the
financing of invasion, to the conventions of commercial trade and of course piracy.88
Europe-whose population had been stimulated by a higher food productivity associated with new tillage technology, the clearing of cultivable lands for fuel, and as a
concomitant to the preparation and transportation of its armies of invasion, and
perhaps by benign climatic changes-had expanded.89Europe extended itself both
horizontally into the establishment of new towns and the resettlement of old ones,
and geopolitically-eastward into the lands of the Prussians, Slavs, and Christian
Byzantium, westward into England, and south into the calves of the Iberian and
Italian peninsula^.^^ The Christian and Jewish merchant lords and bankers of Venice,
Florence, and Genoa, already implicated by the opportunities, associations, and investments of the previous period, successfully resisted their abhorrences of the Muslim infidel and his nefarious trades.91Following the much more frequent practice
among clerics of purchasing dispensations to legitimize their bastard offspring, merchants bought dispensations for their commercial trafficking with the infidels. (Pope
John XXII (1316-34) may have also used one if he had not had the fortune of being
infallible, for he bought forty pieces of gold cloth from Damascus.) Meanwhile, the
gold of Africa, the silks, spices, and sugar of the East and Asia Minor were measured
by the Italians and their Islamic correspondents against European slaves (Slav, Turkish, Bulgar, and Circassian) and goods.92
Europe and the Eastern Trade

In Europe, however, the feudal system had exceeded its limits, politically, economically, and socially. The European crisis that followed manifested itself in the late
thirteenth century and came to full maturity in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
Whatever its root causes-and Wallerstein reminds us of just how subtle the scholars'
PROCESS A N D CONSEQUENCES OF AFRICA'S T R A N S M U T A T I O N

89

debate has become by recalling that Edouard Perroy's thesis was that it was "a saturation of population" and the limits of agrarian technology, while R. H. Hilton believed
that the primary cause was the overbearing expense of feudal superstructures inflated
population
by war and leached by peasant insurrections and famine~~~-Europe's
declined, and its markets, trade, towns, villages, and cultivated areas contracted. It
was not, however, a purely internal affair, nor one entirely dependent upon events or
elements encompassed by human society. It remains for one such force to be noted
for the devastating role it played in the crisis of fourteenth-century Europe.
Along with quite a few other historians, Trevor-Roper has added to his list of
suspects behind the collapse of Europe the Mongol Empire and its dissolution in the
mid-fourteenth century. His reasons include the ideological importance that the
Mongol movement immediately assumed in the minds of European Christian rulers.
Here was a powerful second front against Mamelukes and Turks; here also was a
huge free-trade area from Budapest to Canton; and both could be exploited. . . .
Thus, when the crusaders' way of imperialist colonization had failed, the alternative way of "pure and friendly correspondence" succeeded, and in the century
after the failure of the Crusades, Europe was still living, successfully, on the East. . . .
The great, orderly, tolerant Mongol Empire.94
At first, that is in the 1220s, the Franks had mistaken the intent of the Mongols, basing
their expectations on the fragmentary reports on the Mongols by eastern Christians:
These eastern Christians made a Christian "King David" out of the Mongol conqueror, who would have destroyed the Moslem empires, in order to head for the
Holy Land and liberate J e r ~ s a l e m . ~ ~
By the 1240s, after a series of exchanges between Mongol capitals and armies and
Frankish lords and popes, Christendom had been disabused of its error. It learned
that: "The program of the Mongols was wholly and entirely based on a rule given by
Chingis-khan: 'There is only one God in heaven, and on earth there is only one
sovereign, Chingis-khan.' "96 The Mongol Empire ordered the Pope and the Christian
kings to submit. Still, by the 1260s Mongol and Franks were formally agreeing to joint
crusades against the Muslim Mamelukes, and by the first decades of the fourteenth
century the Italian "merchant republics" and the Mongols had established treaties of
commerce. This meant that whatever other significances Mongol stability, trade, and
technological exchange (e.g., China's gunpowder and printing techniques) would
have for a Europe still compelled by Christian dogma to abhor and shun the southern
infidels, the gold, which was largely brought out of Africa?' found its way to central
and eastern Asia only to pave the route to Europe of the Black Death. William McNeill
describes the plague's itinerary in its less nefarious terms:
Not only did large numbers of persons travel very long distances across cultural and
epidemiological frontiers; they also traversed a more northerly route than had ever

90

ROOTS O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

been intensively traveled before. The ancient Silk Road between China and Syria
crossed the deserts of central Asia, passing from oasis to oasis. Now, in addition to
this old route, caravans, soldiers and postal riders rode across the open grasslands.
They created a territorially vast human web that linked the Mongol headquarters at
Karakorum with Kazan and Astrakhan on the Volga, with Caffa in the Crimea, with
Khanbaliq in China and with innumerable other caravanserais in between.98
Ostensibly, it was the revolt in the eastern end of the Mongol Empire, a revolt that
would culminate in the establishment of the Ming Dynasty, which provided the
chaotic conditions for the vermin to multiply. The account of the plague left by Ibn
al-Ward (who died of plague at Aleppo in 1349) has been generally accepted: it began
somewhere in what al-Ward termed "The Land of Darkness" (Yunnan-Burma) before ~ 3 1 it; then spread to China and northern Asia, and then to central Asia and
eastern Europe-all the time following the Mongol trade route between the Mediterranean and China; by the end of 1347, it crossed from Caffa on the Black Sea to the
Sicilian port of Messina; within three years, it is estimated, more than 20 million
Europeans (one-third to one-half the population of Europe) had joined the more
than 60 million Chinese dead.y9
Islam and the Making of Portugal

Keeping in mind that our interest in the effects of Muslim civilization on Europe is
related to the attempt to reconstruct the processes by which the African past was
extracted from European consciousness, perhaps the greatest irony of this history
concerns the founding of the Portuguese state and the ruling class that ran it. The
Portuguese state's expansion into Africa marks, of course, the beginnings of the
modern era in European development: the "Age of Discovery." It also marks the
beginnings of those encounters between the peoples of the European peninsula and
the African continent that would produce the Negro.
The appearance and the development of the Portuguese state were also the results of processes both directly and indirectly related to Muslim civilization. Though
Anglo-Saxonist shrouds persist in many English-language treatments of Portuguese
history (no doubt in part attributable to Portugal's client relation to Britain since the
eighteenth century), these stories bear some relationship to the past. For instance, in
the mid-twelfth century, as Trevor-Roper recalls,
a party of English and Flemish crusaders, sailing towards the Mediterranean to join
the second crusade, arrived at the mouth of the river Souro. They were easily
persuaded that there was no need to sail further. There were infidels in Portugal,
and lands as rich as any in Palestine: the crusaders agreed; they stayed. Instead of
Edessa they captured Lisbon; and having massacred the Muslim inhabitants and
installed themselves on their lands, they forgot about the Christian kingdom of
Jerusalem and founded that of

PROCESS A N D CONSEQUENCES OF AFRICA'S T R A N S M U T A T I O N

91

As a British historian, Trevor-Roper gives due weight to the English intervention but
ignores their Iberian and French allies (e.g., Henry of Burgundy). Nevertheless, it is
true that erstwhile crusaders played an important part in the establishment of Portugal during the colonial wars against the Muslims. As Americo Castro declares:
The fleet engaged in the conquest of Lisbon had weighed anchor in England with
169 ships provided and manned by Englishmen, Germans, Flemings, Frenchmen,

and Gascons. The towers raised for the conquest of the city were the work of
Flemings, Englishmen, and an engineer from Pisa. All the booty was for the foreigners, who, through a pact with the Moors, took for themselves the gold, the
silver, clothing, the horses, and the mules, and gave the city to the king.lol
Three hundred years later, as the dominant legend goes on, unexercised by the wars
and internal conflicts besetting the leading powers of western Europe; geographically
proximate to the West African Atlantic coast;lo2with both a direct experience of long
distance sea trade and one borrowed from the Italian merchants (who had begun
their own commercial colonization of Portugal by the thirteenth century);lo3and
with a powerful residue of Christian anti-Islamic adventurism, the Portuguese state
launched the first of the great discoveries that would mature into the modern world
systems of Europe and European colonies. By the fifteenth century, Portugal and her
Italian (and English) partners had transformed sugar production, the plantation
system, and, of course, the system of slavery from the islands of the eastern Mediterranean to those of the eastern Atlantic. By the sixteenth century, Spain had inherited the
Italian capitalists and all that went with them-and so had the New World.lo4
Still, as Castro had warned: "It is impossible to understand the formation of the
immense Portuguese Empire solely in terms of economic or statistical analysis."lo5It
might be added that this is particularly the case when such analysis is based on
indifferent historical reconstruction. The "peacefulness" of Portugal's fifteenth century, which C. R. Boxer asserts (and Wallerstein repeats)lo6for example, is to be
doubted when one learns elsewhere that the century was punctuated by a martial and
diplomatic war with Castile, and that the century ended with the homicidal suppression of a dynastic struggle.lo7Castro, himself, came to the conclusion that much more
attention had to be paid to Portuguese nationalism:
Portugal wanted and believed a history of her own, and she did this with such intensity that she was successful little by little incorporating both an imagined history
and the practice of imagining it into the process of her authentic existence. The
imperial enterprises; the enduring imprint of Portugal in Brazil, in the East Indies,
and in Africa; the imposing figures of Vasco da Gama, Affonso de Albuquerque,
Ferdinand Magellan, and others; the works of Gil Vicente and Camoems-all this
and more have motivated the recreation of the origins of Portugal.lo8
This, however, was not a simple "nationalism": a mass ethos bound to a national
destiny. The Portuguese of the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth centuries were an

92

ROOTS O F BLACK R A D I C A L I S M

extraordinary mix of western European and Mediterranean peoples. More important, the new nation's ruling classes, the nobility and the bourgeoisie who wove the
ideological tapestry of nationalism and constructed those ideographs that framed
their families and deeds, were drawn from the landed and titled aristocracies of Spain
(Castile, Aragon, and Catalonia), France (Flanders and Burgundy), and England.lo9
The threads of Portuguese nationalist identity were spun from a European source.
Portugal inherited, consequently, not merely its royal houses-and their Italian capitalist creditors, but as well the mercantile and scientific migration that was the social
and intellectual efflux of Venice, Genoa, Pisa, Majorca, Florence, Flanders, Catalonia,
and England. With these disparate elements came, too, a certain malaise and the
resolve to construct a state whose character would be distinct from the corrupt,
chaotic, and mean societies from which they had fled or been driven:
Those Europeans found Europe morally distasteful, with constant internecine wars
between so-called Christian princes; with heresy rife, and schism a fact for almost
forty years; with confused relations ever apparent between ecclesiastical and secular
authority; with charity often non-existent; with marriage made a mockery, and
adultery widespread; with lying and unvarnished thievery apparent on every side.' l o
It was again, this "nationalism," and particularly the element of Muslim antagonism, that played such a critical role in Portuguese expansionism in the fifteenth
century. Robert Silverberg, in chronicling Portugal's and Europe's fascination with
Prester John, has recorded:
In 1411, when Portugal had arrived at an unaccustomed state of complete peace,
Joao of Avis adopted a suggestion of his English-born queen, Philippa: to maintain
the momentum of the national economy, he would send an armed expedition to
North Africa. Joao and Philippa envisioned a conquest of the Moorish kingdom of
Fez, thus opening the way for a Portuguese penetration, by land, of Prester John's
kingdom, somewhere in the heart of Africa. With Prester John's cooperation,
perhaps, a new spice route could be established, with caravans crossing Africa from
Morocco to the Red Sea and bringing pepper and cloves to Lisbon.]l 1
Dom Henrique (the Navigator), who is credited with marshalling the energies of
Portugal, the resources of the Order of Christ, the skills and instruments of Europe's
most developed seamanship, and the navigational wisdom of Muslim and Italian
mathematicians, cartographers, astronomers, and geographers for the purpose of
exploring Africa and its coastline for a route to the Indies and to Prester John, was of
course the ascetic, celibate, and reclusive son of the newly royal Joao and Philippa.
Following the Portuguese capture of Ceuta in 1415, for more than forty years, Dom
Henrique dedicated himself to the achievement of his parents' dream. Henrique,
however, was not distinctive in this regard. He was in reality simply a more psychologically severe version of his family and the class with whose destiny it was intimately
linked.l12Francis Rogers quite effectively argued:

PROCESS A N D CONSEQUENCES OF AFRICA'S TRANSMUTATION

93

The Lusitanian translation of the European dreams concerning the East into action
was precipitated, not by Ceuta, but by the simultaneous Council of Constance. It
gained further impetus with brother Pedro's travels . . . and final direction by
Portuguese relations with Pope Eugenius IV and the Council of Ferrara-FlorenceRome. . . .
I am convinced that various manifestations of Western Europe's great Oriental
dream came to bear on Pedro as he wandered, and that by, let us say, 1433 or 1434
(the beginning of Duarte's reign), the royal brothers, including and most especially Henry, had talked over at length the exciting reports related by Pedro upon
his return."j
Gomes Eannes de Azurara, his historian contemporary, recorded Dom Henrique's
motives:
1. [Henrique] desired to know what lands there were beyond the Canary Islands
and a cape called Bojador. . . .
2. If in these territories there should be any population of Christians, or any
harbours where men could enter without peril, they could bring back to the realm
many merchandises at little cost. . . .
3. It was said that the power of the Moors of this land of Africa was very much
greater than was generally thought, and that there were among them neither
Christians nor other races. And because every wise man is moved by desire to know
the strength of his enemy. . .
4. During one and thirty years of battles with the Moors, the Infante had never
found Christian King or Seigneur outside this kingdom, who for the love of Our
Lord Jesus Christ was willing to aid him in this war. He desired to know whether in
those regions there might be any Christian princes in whom the charity and love of
Christ were strong enough to cause them to aid him against these enemies of the
faith.
5. . . . [L] ost souls should be saved.
6. [The astrological reason, from which all the others proceed, that as Henrique
was born on 4 March 1394, he was under the influence of] the Ram, which is in the
House of Mars, with the Sun in the ascendant. . . . [Tlhis indicated that this prince
was bound to engage in great and noble conquests, and above all he was bound to
attempt the discovery of things which were hidden from other men, and secret.lI4
Silverberg added, in order to underscore his own interest, that Henrique had "told
one of his companions in 1442, he desired to have knowledge not only of Africa and
the Indies but 'of the land of Prester John as well, if he could.' "'I5 One hundred years
later, at the beginning of the sixteenth century, the quest that had so obsessed the
House of Avis from its own beginnings (and before it Europe for 300 years) was finally
completed. Pero da Covilha, the Portuguese king (1495-1521) Manuel 1's emissary to
Prester John's kingdom, was discovered by his ambassadorial successors to have
become an honored but unwilling captive for life of the court of Ethiopia.Il6 Islam
94

ROOTS O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

had provided for the emerging Europe a powerful ideological, economic, and political impulse.
There was, however, one element in Islamic civilization that had little or no effect
on medieval Europe as the latter was being transformed into the center of a dominant
world system. This was the Muslim concept of the slave. Great differences persisted
between slavery in Western and Christian societies and slavery in Islam.
The Prophet had said:
Fear God concerning your slaves. Feed them with what you eat and clothe them
with what you wear and do not give them work beyond their capacity. Those whom
you like, keep, and those whom you dislike, sell. Do not cause pain to God's
creation. He caused you to own them, and had He so wished he would have made
them own you.l17
The Islamic ideal concerning slavery was without parallel in Christian law and dogma.
Islamic jurists had codified both the liabilities and the rights of slaves; customs among
the Sunni, Shia, and Maliki schools had limited the rights of masters and extended the
legal, religious, and social capacities of the slave. The Koran encouraged manumission
as an act of piety, in many instances the punishment for criminal acts was less harsh
for the slave than the freeman, slaves might purchase their freedom and might assume
second-rank offices in state administration and the religious hierarchy. Since Muslim
slavery was characteristically associated with unlimited potential for social mobility
and much less racialism, it is not surprising to find whole dynasties in Muslim history founded by slaves (e.g., the Egyptian Mamelukes) or the emergence to prominence of Africans as soldiers, poets, philosophers, writers, and statesmen. As early as
the eighth century,
Ibrahim, the son of a Black concubine of the caliph al-Mahdi (775-85) came very
close to being caliph in 817-19 when a faction in Baghdad supported his candidature against the nominated successor of the caliph al-Ma'mun. In spite of being
"excessively black and shiny" he was preferred by some 'Abbasid loyalists to the
'Alid candidate of Persian descent.l18
Al-Mustansir, another such son, Hunwick reports, reigned in Egypt between 1036 and
1094. In the seventeenth century, Mulay Isma'il, sharing the same condition, ruled in
Morocco. Even Black eunuchs such as Kafur who ruled Egypt for 22 years could
achieve enormous power.
That Christendom failed to be impressed by Islamic law and customs on this
matter is hardly surprising since the traditions of European slavery were already quite
ancient and quite elaborately rationalized by the time of the appearance of Islam in
the seventh century. Moreover, it was highly improbable that the Christian establishment of the medieval era would countenance the adaptation of customs from what
they considered the ultimate Christian heresy-Islam, many believed, was based on
sexual license and forced conversion;119and finally, Western xenophobia-so critical
to the character of European identity and so fundamental to Christian slave systemsPROCESS A N D CONSEQUENCES OF AFRICA'S T R A N S M U T A T I O N

9s

expressed a revulsion toward Muslim ideals. "A fund of xenophobia was latent in the
homogeneous culture of E ~ r o p e , ' "is
~ ~how Norman Daniel has put it. Further:
[Xlenophobia and hysteria were compounded at the inception of the Crusades and
it is a mistake to view them as an isolable phenomenon They were just one European activity. Fighting, robbing, killing, trading, making profits, taking rents or
tributes, all these were closely linked to philosophical and theological analysis, to
the composition of history and propaganda, and even to love of one's neighbor.
The Crusades renewed the idea that we need not do as we would be done by. They
were also an expression of a much older history of suspicion. . . . The expectation of
difference goes back to the cultural intolerance of "barbarians" which is one of the
less useful legacies of Greece.lzl
This is not to deny that there were no differences among Christians respecting slavery.
There were, in medieval Christendom, as later. Debates between Christian masters,
notwithstanding, David Brion Davis observed that "the distinctive characteristic of
medieval theology [was] to justify the existing world while providing the means for
escaping from it."Iz2
In the late Medieval Age, the defenders of slavery, whether the issue was the
enslavement of Europeans, infidels, "Indians," or Blacks, frequently turned to the
pages of Aristotle to justify slavery as a natural condition of some parts of mankind.Iz3
In the early sixteenth century, when Fray Bartolome de las Casas converted from
colonialist to anticolonialist pamphleteer, it was Aristotle whom he was forced to
confront and use for his own purposes:
He described Aristotle as "a gentile burning in Hell whose doctrine we do not need
to follow, except in so far as it conforms with Christian truth." . . .
But . . . Las Casas equally applied the Aristotelian model to "prove" that the
Indians were rational beings, not one whit inferior to the Spaniards or any European, ancient or modern for that matter, but in some respects even superior to
Europeans. lz4
Las Casas's ploy met, however, with only quite limited success in either his own time
or later. His Very Brief Account of the Destruction of the Indies was roundly denounced by his contemporaries and their successors. Aristotle's "aristocracy of race"
was proved to be much closer to the core of Western civilization than the complaints
of Las Casas, his fellow priests Motolinia and de Landa, or such co-sympathizers as
governor de Castaneda of Nicaragua and the anonymous bureaucrat who reported
on the brutal excesses of Viceroy de Mendoza of New Spain. As Mavis Campbell has
suggested with polemical force:
It should not be too out of place to remind ourselves here that this concept of
race has never since been too far from the European psyche, peering out sporadically, with blue eyes and lily white skin, whether through that grotesque Sepulveda
[one of Las Casas' most persistent opponents] who spoke of the "Superior" Span96

ROOTS OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

iards, and applied the very Greek word "barbarian" to the Indians, or through
Count Gobineau or Richard Wagner and his son-in-law, Houston Stewart Chamberlain, or Thomas Carlyle who had much influence on New World slavery,
culminating in the megalomaniac excesses of Hitler and the racist regimes in
Southern Africa.125
Aristotle was thus sustained into the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
until a more scientistic rationale could overtake the ideological needs of the New
Imperialism. Still, through Aristotle the convergence of moral resolution and practical necessity between Christian societies of the medieval and modern periods and the
slave societies of the pre-Christian eras was striking:
[Flrom the Homeric period onward the passionate adherence of the Greeks to the
desire for political and personal liberty made it difficult for them to find a satisfactory explanation of their own slave organization. . . . Plato's reaction took the form
of a mild protest that Greeks should not enslave their fellow Greeks while, as a
matter of fact, the Hellenes of his day were using their fellow Hellenes as slaves, and
without much compunction about it. Aristotle's explanation of the origin of slavery was rationally based upon the then accepted theory of congenital and heritable
differences in human capacities, as displayed both individually and in national
totalities. . . . His definition of a slave in the Politics is not so admirable . . .: a slave is
a tool with a soul. Only in the most superficial and materialistic sense is this true.
The slave, as a human being, is not a tool; and a tool has not a s0u1.l~~
In Islamic societies, however, the nature and the thrust of religious authority left little
leeway for the use of Aristotle or any other non-Muslim apologists of slavery in this
fashion.
Islam and Eurocentrism

The history of Europe for the millennium following the fifth century of the Christian
era had not been markedly unilinear. That immense span of time had contained little
if any basis for teleological certainty. Indeed, there had been eras such as the eighth
century when the very presence of Western high culture had been faint, preserved in
scattered outposts whose own fate was made doubly uncertain by barbarian invasion
and the pathetic social and material conditions of the pagan societies that surrounded
them.
By the year 700, European learning had fled to the bogs of Ireland or the wild coast
of Northumbria. It was in the monasteries of Ireland that fugitive scholars preserved a knowledge of the Latin and even of the Greek classics. It was in a monastery in Northumbria that the greatest scholar of his time, the greatest historian of
the whole Middle Ages, the Venerable Bede, lived and wrote. And it was from the
monasteries of Ireland and England, in the eighth and ninth centuries, that English
and Irish fugitives would return to a devastated E~rope.'~'
PROCESS A N D CONSEQUENCES O F AFRICA'S T R A N S M U T A T I O N

97

Christendom slowly recovered. During what would be called the Dark Age, allied
with barbarian chiefs and kings, converted or otherwise, the church gradually grew
into the most mature base for the feudal organization that characterized the early
Middle Ages. It acquired land, and the peasants and slaves who made that land
productive and valuable. Without the slightest sense of its moral bankruptcy, moreover, the leaders of the Christian Church unmercifully exploited its human base,
legitimating the brutality of the nobility, their secular kin, and sharing the profits
from the labor of bound workers and a foreign trade more than eight centuries long
that delivered European slaves (among other goods) to Muslim merchants. Feudal
Europe, for a time, however, proved to be capable of expansion while rotting from
within-but it was only for a time.
By the thirteenth century, that phase of European development was at a close; the
system collapsed. The ruling classes of feudal Europe were succeeded by their Mediterranean factors: merchants, traders, and bankers. They in turn spawned or defined
the roles for those actors who supplied capital, technical, and scientific expertise, and
administrative skills to the states that would lead the emergence of capitalist Europe.
By then, however, European culture and consciousness had been profoundly affected.
Legend, as we have seen, acquired the authority of history. Moral authority continued
to dissipate. The mystifying veil, which the feudal ruling classes had created to hide, or
at least soften the crushing oppression that they had put in place, was in tatters.
Prester John's first appearance in the European imagination of the twelfth century
was consequently understandable.
The legend, if it indeed originated from within the ruling class, accomplished two
very disparate ends: for one it presented Europe's intelligentsia with a powerful
counterpoint, inspired by Christian idealism, biblical imagery and splendor, Roman
law, and Greco-Egyptian civil craftsmanship. Here was the ideal Christian society,
secure in its political body and spiritual soul. It was the measure by which the failures
and insidious corruptions of actual Christendom could be calibrated in detail. A
model Christian Empire, which, when compared to Europe, displayed those faults
that had contributed to the inability to defeat Islam either spiritually or militarily.
This was the legend's internal function.
Its other significance, however, was even more critical. The legend transmuted the
Whatever was the reality
world beyond Europe, "the Indies," into Eurocentric terms.128
of those lands and their peoples, came to be less and less important. For the next 300
years, between the twelfth and the fifteenth centuries, the legend of Prester John
provided Europe's scholars and their less learned coreligionists with a structured and
obfuse prism through which the authenticity of every datum, every traveler's report,
every intelligence of its foreign trade, every fable of its poets, and every phatic foible of
its soldiery would be screened and strained. Even direct evidence was not immune, for
in the next century, G. K. Hunter tells us, this "frame of reference" was sustained:
The new information which the English voyages of the sixteenth century brought
to the national culture had to be fitted, as best it could, into a received image of
98

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

what was important. This means that the facts were not received in quite the same
way as they would have been in the nineteenth century. Historians of the last
century were much taken with the idea of the Elizabethan imagination liberated by
the voyagers. But there is little evidence of this outside the unhistorical supposition, "that's how I would have reacted." The voyages certainly did expand the
physical horizon, but it is not clear that they expanded the cultural horizon at the
same time. . . . The image of man in his theological, political and social aspects
could not be much affected by the discovery of empty or primitive lands.129
The architects of European consciousness had begun the construction of that worldview that presumed the basic structure of other than European societies was at its
foundation a European structure, that the moral, ideological, and spiritual scaffold of
these societies was the same bottom structure discernible in European culture, that
the measure of mankind was indeed the European. The legend of Prester John and his
wondrous realm, the formidability of this purely Christian king who waited in patience for his Christian allies at the other end of the world, all this was the form of the
impulse in its appropriate medieval costume. Thus, when the miraculous kingdom
could not be located in the deserts and steppes of central Asia or even Cathay, it did
not cease its fascination but was transferred to the south beyond the upper Nile. The
fantasy and its attendant resolve to bend the very existence and being of other peoples
into convenient shapes were important beginnings for the destruction of the African
past. While the vitality of Islam had seemed to mock the pathetic feebleness of Christ's
chosen, humiliating them in defeat and with the persistent threat of further occupations and invasions, the legend was compelling. And a basic lesson of propaganda was
learned: Europe's destiny was incompatible with the autochthonous meaning of the
non-European worlds. An increasingly prominent concomitant of the European millennium (roughly from the tenth to the present century) would be the refutation of
those terms.
In freeing itself from Muslim colonization, Europe once again had a vigorous
bourgeoisie and the state institutions to begin the construction of its own extraEuropean colonialism. From the fifteenth century on, that colonialism would encompass the lands of Asian, African, and New World peoples and engulf a substantial
fraction of those peoples into the European traditions of slave labor and exploitation.
Capitalists were, from this point on, no longer dependent upon the material restraints
Europe presented for the primitive accumulation of capital. What Genoese, Pisantine,
and Jewish capitalists accomplished for Portugal and Spain in the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries, on their expulsions from Iberia they transferred to
northwestern Europe. Soon after, an English bourgeoisie succeeded those of Belgium
and the Netherlands in the domination of the now-extensive world system. We have,
however, gone far beyond our immediate interests in the Muslim part in Europe's
development. Here we must conclude, still somewhat arbitrarily and abruptly, the
survey of the significance of Islam in European history. For the moment it will have to
be sufficient to remind ourselves that Islam once represented a more powerful civiliPROCESS A N D CONSEQUENCES O F AFRICA'S T R A N S M U T A T I O N

99

zation, and, again, one closely identified in the European mind with African and
Black peoples.
In retrospect the Western potential for creating the Negro had moved closer in a
way to its realization. The cultural and ideological inventory was at hand. A native
racialism had already displayed its usefulness for rationalizing social order, and with
the advent of the Islamic intrusion into European history it had further proved its
value by its transformation into an instrument of collective resistance and a negation
of an unacceptable past. For the Negro to come into being all what was now required
was an immediate cause, a specific purpose. The trade in African slaves, coming as it
did as an extension of capitalism and racial arrogance, supplied both a powerful
motive and a readily received object.

100 R O O T S O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

and fuel."2 Braudel, on the other hand, has suggested that western Mediterranean
overpopulation was the key to e~pansion.~
There are also those who have argued, like
Livermore, that the motivation was organizationally systemic, that the militaristic
machinery of the Reconquista required new "targets of opportunity" if it were not to
be turned i n ~ a r dOthers,
.~
as we have noted earlier, with more attention to ideology,
have supposed the real issue was the defeat of the Muslims and the revitalization of
Chri~tendom.~
No single such explanation seems entirely correct or sufficiently specific, though all have been persuasively presented. The result is that at the grand level
of reconstruction, the analysis of fifteenth-century Portugal and its historical role
would appear to have no satisfactory measure for distilling this multiplicity of needs,
actors, and historical forces. Still, though their number might be confusing, reconstruction of the actual power relations between these actors may simplify the task of
their identification and assessment.
One generally unrecognized but crucial relationship, when we speak in strictly
political terms, involved a relatively weak but native feudal ruling class and its more
powerful extra-national ruling-class allies. Specifically, this amounted to an alliance
between Portugal's House of Avis, with its neodynastic nobility and bourgeoisie: and
a strain of capitalistic aristocracy that had been bred in England by war and civil war,
political chaos, and economic recession, and a close connection to an emerging
British bourgeoisie. In fifteenth-century England, Postan has surmised:
The great breeding season of English capitalism was in the early phases of the
Hundred Years War, the time when the exigencies of Royal finance, new experiments in taxation, speculative ventures with wool, the collapse of Italian finance
and the beginning of the new cloth industry, all combined to bring into existence a
new race of war financiers and commercial speculators, army purveyors and woolmonopolist^.^
Historically, the relationship between the maturing ruling classes of Portugal and
England had been sealed at the end of the fourteenth century with the Treaty of
Windsor (1386),which secured the Portuguese throne from the ambitions of Castile's
monarchy, and was itself closed by the marriage between Joao of Avis and Philippa of
Lancaster, the daughter of John of Gaunt. This alliance was one that the English had
The designs
believed would ultimately lead to the acquisition of the throne of Ca~tile.~
of the English on Castile were never fulfilled. The conclusion of the Hundred Years
War, with its disastrous results on English territorial interests on the continent, a civil
war in England and Spain's own national vigor at the end of the century, extinguished
those interests. But the relationship with Portugal would prove to be one so valuable
that it is still celebrated by English historians. In our own century, for example, Carus
Wilson has written:
Portugal's relations with England were consistently friendly. These two states were
naturally disposed to be allies, since neither of them was on good terms with
Castile. There was also kinship between their dynasties, and the men of both
102

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

countries were born seamen and adventurers. . . . The friendship . . . lasted on in
spite of temporary ruptures through acts of violence and changes of dynasty in
England; and throughout the fifteenth century the provisions made in this charter
of commerce [the Treaty of Windsor] were confirmed, and the kings of both
countries were pledged to punish infractions of it.9
As C. R. Boxer would have it, these Portuguese "kings" were, of course, "half-English
princes." War had brought these two nobilities together. War had indeed been the
very basis of their existence. War, finally, had so enlarged their political alliance until it
achieved what could pass for historical proportions, surviving several centuries despite "temporary ruptures." Regardless, in the fifteenth century-when the necessary
conditions for the Atlantic slave trade were being laid down-the link between the
emerging bourgeoisies resident in (but not always native to) the two countries provided the basis for a North Atlantic commerce and the mercantilisms that would
dominate their economies for the next three hundred years. This would prove no
small matter for the directions in which the slave trade would develop.
The Genoese Bourgeoisie
and the Age of Discovery

Even more important than these political relations, however, and certainly more
directly germane to our interests in the Portuguese as the historical force that laid the
basis for the Atlantic slave trade, were the merchants and bankers of Italian origins
who colonized Portugal (and the Spanish kingdoms) during this period. Though
Verlinden's use of the term "nation" is more figurative than political, his characterization of the historical significance of these capitalists is helpful:
Italy was the only really colonizing nation during the middle ages. From the
beginning of the crusades onwards, Venice, Pisa, Genoa, later Florence, and southern Italy under the Angevins as well as under the Aragonese, were interested in the
Levant and in the economic and colonial possibilities offered there by the gradual
waning of the Byzantine Empire. It is also at about the same time that Italian
merchants appear in the Iberian peninsula, and obtain an influence that will persist
until far into the modern period, both in European and colonial economy.'O
Virginia Rau notes that "[tlhe earliest documental references we have concerning
the activities of Italian merchants in Portugal date from the XIIIth century. When
they come to our notice, they had already boldly found their way into the Portuguese money market.")" These "Italian merchants" were in fact (in order of importance) Genoese and the sons of Piacenza, Milan, Florence, and Venice.12 Further,
we learn from Rau that by the fourteenth century, whose beginnings were appropriately marked by the appointment by King Diniz of a Genoese (Manuel Pezagno)13to
the Portuguese admiralty in 1317, Lisbon had become "the great centre of Genoese
trade."14 With Lisbon and Oporto as bases of operation, the Genoese merchantA T L A N T I C SLAVE TRADE A N D A F R I C A N LABOR

103

capitalists ensconced themselves into the entire structure of Portuguese power: serving as creditors to the monarchy, financiers for the state's ambitions and adventures,
monopolists under royal charters of security, and ultimately Portuguese nobles by a
series of events including royal decrees, marriage into the native nobility, and participation in military projects organized by the state.I5 Precisely as Rau's example of
the Lomellini family would suggest-beginning with the appearance of Bartholomeu
Lomellini, the merchant, in Portugal in 1424 and ending with integration of his heirs
and relatives into the landed aristocracy of Madeira and the peninsular nobility by the
end of the century-the Genoese merchant princes proved to be far more successfully adaptable than their countrymen (i.e., Italian) competitors. Unlike the arrogant
Venetians, the Genoese made themselves available to their hosts financially, intellectually and fraternally. As Wallerstein has observed:
To the extent that [the Portuguese bourgeoisie] lacked the capital, they found it
readily available from the Genoese who, for reasons of their own having to do with
their rivalry with Venice, were ready to finance the Portuguese. And the potential
conflict of the indigenous and foreign bourgeoisie was muted by the willingness of
the Genoese to assimilate into Portuguese culture over time.I6
While the Venetians continued to concentrate on the domination of the Mediterranean, and the Florentines on their banking and wool trade in continental and north
Atlantic commerce, the Genoese positioned themselves to take advantage of the trade
that eventually would progress from the Maghreb, to the mid-Atlantic and finally to
the trans-Atlantic.I7 By the middle of the fifteenth century, it was their capital that
determined the direction and pace of "discovery." Verlinden remarks:
Lagos [Portugal] became, from about 1310, an important harbor on the route of the
Italian convoys to northwestern Europe. If one remembers that Lagos, much more
than Sagres, was the starting point of the first Portuguese discoveries, the importance of the bonds, established there with Italian seamen and businessmen, grows
evident. l 8
Moreover, it was the favored status of these Italians in Portugal that facilitated Portuguese claims at Rome resulting in Papal Bulls sympathetic to Portuguese commerce
and state imperialism,I9 and it was Genoese capitalists who sustained the links between the English and Portuguese ruling classes by assuming a relationship to English
trade and the state directly complementary to their presence in P o r t ~ g a l . ~ ~
In England, as in Portugal, Genoese made up the bulk of the Italian merchants who
in turn composed the majority of alien merchants in that kingdom during the fifteenth century.21There, too, they won royal exemptions from commercial taxes and
restrictions, and managed to monopolize imported goods as diverse as the foreign
medicines (like medicated treacle) and other drugs in vogue during that century,22
and Portuguese cork and sugar at whose points of origin they had already contracted
exclusive m o n o p o l i e ~ .Finally,
~~
in England, too, as creditors for its kings, as fac-

104

R O O T S O F BLACK R A D I C A L I S M

tors and merchants for royal monopolies, they came to occupy special positions in
English trade:
In vain the English petitioned against the lavish privileges obtained with a great
sum by these merchants from needy kings whose financiers they had become,
begging that they might be restricted to bringing goods of their own manufacture;
unable to vie with the mighty Italian cities in wealth, the little English towns
received scant attention.24
In an England rent by civil war, court intrigues, and a fractious aristocratic class, the
financial support of the Italians along with their trade and concomitant sources of
intelligence could be decisive. The English monarchy, with its Italian and other foreign commercial and financial collaborators, for the time being secured an independence from its native aristocratic and bourgeois classes.
It was in this way that Italian capitalists situated themselves to play a critical role in
determining the pace, the character, and the structure of the early trans-Atlantic slave
trade of the next century. Without them and the complicity of part of the English
aristocracy and of the Portuguese and English merchant classes, and, of course, the
clerical nobility of Rome, it is doubtful that a Portuguese Empire would ever have
come into existence. Without that empire, nothing would be as it is.
The Portuguese Empire did come into being, however, and from the middle of the
fifteenth century and for the next one hundred years-to the good fortunes ofboth its
national and expatriate sponsors-its mixture of greed, piety, savagery, militarism,
cultural arrogance, and statescraft swept across the world. Not surprisingly, given the
long-standing preoccupations of medieval long-distance merchants, the winds of
commercial interests blew the empire first to the south and east: Senegambia,Elmina,
and Luanda along the west coast of Africa; Safala, Mozambique and Mombasa on the
African east coast; Hormuz in the Persian Gulf; Goa on the Malabar coast of India;
Malacca in Malay; and Ternate in the Moluccas. And if their several motives still
perplex us, at least to some of them the issue was clear:
When the Portuguese finally came ashore at Calicut, some astonished Tunisian
traders in the crowd asked them what the devil had brought them so far. "Christians and spices," was the answer allegedly given by da Gama's men. . . . This
close association between God and Mammon formed the hallmark of the empire
founded by the Portuguese in the East, and, for that matter, in Africa and in Brazil
as well.25
Once the Portuguese had rounded what was for them the Cape of Good Hope (and
perhaps even before they reached that point), these voyagers had become actually an
analogue of the Chinese who preceded them: we refer, of course, to the "seven
massive" imperial expeditionary fleets commanded by the Muslim admiral Cheng Ho
between 1405 and 1434 (Cheng Ho died that year) that had already confidently assayed
these waters for trade and plunder.26The Chinese ventures that with their fleets of

A T L A N T I C SLAVE T R A D E A N D A F R I C A N L A B O R

I05

junks carrying sometimes as many as 40,000 people, amounted to convoys of "impressive intercontinental missiles" according to William Appleman W i l l i a m ~With
.~~
its fleets the Chinese Empire successfully challenged the Arab and Muslim traders
who had already grown accustomed to their own domination of the East African and
Indian Ocean commercial trades. This did not please the former masters of the trade
of these seas, but it did not seem to matter. Whatever the weight of their resistance it
never amounted to enough to be included among the reasons speculated to underlie
the apparently sudden imperial decision to forego further adventures in the area.28
The withdrawal would seem to have been an affair internal to the Chinese Empire.
The Portuguese, less audaciously but necessarily more cunning,29accomplished the
displacement of the area's "resident" tradesmen at the end of the century and the
beginnings of the next. Momentarily, the maritime markets most coveted by Europeans were in the hands of the Portuguese/Italians-the African and south Atlantic
trades with their gold, salt, malagueta pepper, gum, cork, cereals, sugar, and slaves;
and the trade with the East with its spices, wools, and dyes.30This Portuguese monopoly was, however, not entirely uncontested in E ~ r o p e . In
~ ' the Atlantic region, Castile's commercial strata had shadowed its rival's ventures along the Guinea coast from
at least as early as 1453-54, laying claims through the Castilian crown to both Guinea
and the Canary island^.^^ The controversy between the "two Catholic kings" continued even beyond its formal resolution by the Treaty of Toledo (1480) and into the
following century. It was punctuated by raids by each of the other's merchant shipping and trading posts, and by claims and counterclaims to ancient or papal privil e g e ~Though
. ~ ~ their defeat would prove to be only a temporary setback, the point is
that the monarchal claimants of Spain lost. With the south Atlantic closed to them for
legitimate merchant exploitation, the Spanish Crown and its native and Italian partners began to explore the possibilities of an entirely different route to the East.34
Genoese Capital, the Atlantic,
and a Legend

For Spain, the key to its achievement of a western route to the "East" was, as it had
been for the Portuguese Empire of the Indies, the Genoese. In particular, in Seville in
1492, the experience, energies, and ambitions of the Genoese became concentrated in
the figure of Cristofolo Colombo (Christopher Columbus). Still it was not a simple or
straightforward event, there were some elements of even this relationship between the
Spanish and the Italians that in retrospect seem almost entirely fortuitous.
Although much of his background before his journey to Seville in 1485 will probably always remain obscure, Columbus was in many ways a natural if not typical
bourgeois creation of Genoese capital, trade, and manufacturing. Born around 1451of
parents whose origins appear to have been in the Ligurian Republic, Columbus, at
fourteen years of age, first took up his father's trade: wool weaving.35Notwithstanding the fictional constructions of his past that Columbus, his son Ferdinand, and Las

106 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

Casas would perpetrate, it appears he remained a weaver into his early twenties,
taking part in occasional voyages in that capacity to Genoese possessions in the
Mediterranean.36Around 1476, the documents of his contemporaries place him on a
voyage to England undertaken by the bankers Giovanni Antonio di Negro and Nicolas Spinola. This trip was intercepted by French pirates, and the survivors, Columbus
among them, found refuge in Li~bon.~'
Columbus settled in Lisbon and llke some
other notable Genoese bourgeoisie, he eventually married into Portuguese nobility.
In his case, Felipa Moniz Perestrello, whose family had property on the island of Porto
Santo near Madeira, became his wife and his entree into the stream of Portuguese
overseas expansion.38
By all rights, the credit for Columbus's rediscovery of the "new world" beyond the
ocean should have attached to the Portuguese throne. Columbus had taken up residence in Lisbon in 1477 and five years later had made his first attempt at petitioning
for state sponsorship (and the grant of feudal privileges) at the royal court of Portugal. Interestingly enough, it is still not clear what Columbus had in mind at this stage
for what he would persist in describing as his divinely appointed mission. It is very
possible that Columbus's initial petition (1482) concerned islands in the Atlantic
rather than the search for a mainland, but by 1484, a second submission spoke of
Cipango (Japan) and Cathay (China).39Apparently, Columbus's application was
clumsily constructed (Davies believed that Columbus had no command of written
Latin until 1489 and never mastered the writing of Italian or Portuguese), his calculations unpersuasive, and his use of cosmographies authority suspect.40The court's
Mathematical Junta, after a year of study of Columbus's proposal and consultation
with Martin Behain,41the Nuremberg cartographer, convinced King Joao I1 to reject
Columbus's project on the grounds that Joao had "information regarding the western
~
technical commission
lands more positive than the visions of C o l ~ m b u s . "If~ Joao's
now appears to have been a bit dismissive of Columbus's scheme, the same could be
said of Castile, the more enthused but still cautious Andalusian dukes of MedinaSidonia and Medina-Celi, and the English Crown (in England, Columbus had been
represented by his brother, Barto1omeo)-all of whom rejected the Genoese's petitions for support between 1485-89.
The Portuguese, however, seemed to have been on fairly firm ground, for at least by
1486 there is some indication that some of their seamen had sighted land west of the
Azores. Verlinden is confident enough of this to conclude: "What is certain is that in
1486 the talk was no longer of one Island of the Seven Cities, but of the possibility of
an archipelago or even a continent. Clearly, then, the period of the hypothetical or
legendary island had passed."43 For some at court, the western route across the
seas to Cipango and Cathay-a distance calculated by the Florentine mathematician
and cosmographer Toscanelli to be 5,000 miles and by Columbus as 3,500 milesappeared to be a distinct p~ssibility.~~
Thus, in 1487, the same year that (Verlinden
points out) saw Pero da Covilhao and Afonso da Paiva pursuing Portuguese interests
in India, Arabia, and Ethiopia, and Bartolomeu Dias round the Cape of Good Hope

A T L A N T I C SLAVE T R A D E A N D A F R I C A N L A B O R

107

(all three contributions to the Portuguese commitment to the African route to the
East), the Portuguese Crown had authorized its own exploration of a western route.45
Since the bourgeoisie dominating the Genoese colony of Lisbon were unwilling to
show any tangible interest in a western route, the Portuguese Crown's participation in
the project mounted (and paid for) by the Flemish Azoresian Ferdinand van Olmen
) ~ ~the Por(Bartolome de las Cases would refer to him as Hernan de O l m ~ s and
tuguese Madeiran, Joham Afomso do Estreito, was limited to the ceding of jurisdictional powers and territorial rights in the new land. The Crown was apparently
incapable of much more than that when it sought to act independently of its major
commercial partners. Unfortunately for the Portuguese monarch, neither van Olmen
nor Estreito ever returned from their winter excursion.
Columbus was a bit luckier than either of his predecessors in the Atlantic, for at
least he had their example to profit from. Verlinden is convinced that "Columbus
must have learned of the voyage in Seville, for there was active communication
between the Italian colony of Lisbon and that of the great Andalusian port."47This
would, of course, imply that the Genoese families, their joint-stock companies, and
their banks were in the habit of exchanging or sharing information that might be of
value to their commercial interests. Whatever the case might be, Columbus did find
something of value in Seville:
Italian bankers, much of whose activities were blocked by the Turks, were the
financiers for a big part of ocean-borne trade. There was a Genoese commercial
colony in Seville and local links with the Italian banking house of Spinola and Di
Negri, Columbus's old employer. Francesco Pinelli, a Genoese banker of Seville and
co-director of the Santa Hermandad, the Spanish state police, guaranteed a loan
for the Columbus plan. Pinelli's fellow police director was none other than Luis de
Santangel, the royal treasurer.48
With the support, at least, of these two highly placed Genoese, and several forms of
assistance from the powerful Pinzon family, which dominated the port of Palos de la
Fr0ntera,4~Columbus now had a project worthy of the Spanish Crown's official
support. And if we recall that Columbus's appearance before Ferdinand and Isabella
coincided historically with that moment when the Spanish Crown was intent upon its
self-appointed mission to unify Spain, centralize state authority, vanquish its rivals
among its own aristocracy, and acquire an independent source of capital for itself,
Columbus and his Genoese collaborators and countrymen were an almost perfect
instrument.
Italian support was unquestionably well received, at least by the rulers. Ferdinand
the Catholic, in particular, understood admirably the contribution Italian capital
and techniques could make at that crucial time to his kingdom. Coming from the
east of the peninsula, he was accustomed to look to the Mediterranean and Italy
and considered economic relations with that country as obvious and natural. This

108 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

attitude of mind dictated a similar policy in Andalusia, in the Canary Islands, and
in America, when destiny put control of these areas into his hands.50
Here was a resourceful community whose very existence rested on the persistence of
its interdependence with the state. The colonial trade that the Genoese (and Italian)
community dominated, the capital that it commanded, the inventory of science and
culture that it possessed, all were Spanish at the pleasure of the state-no matter how
independently powerful and significant they might appear to be. And for the moment
it was the state's pleasure to balance the Italians (and also-but not for long-the
Jews) against its own bourgeoisie and its still militaristic arist~cracy.~~
Columbus's
luck was holding.
With only the barest of exaggeration, then, it might be said that Columbus's
achievements of 1492-beginning with the extraordinary concessions he acquired
from his royal partners in April of that year at Santa Fe, and ending with the arrival of
the ships under his command in the West Indian islands in October-amounted to
one more level on the extraordinary financial scaffold that Genoese and other Italian
capitalist families had been constructing in the Iberian peninsula for nearly 300 years.
When Columbus came to terms with Ferdinand and Isabella, the road had been paved
for him by Genoese admirals who had served Portuguese and Spanish kings for
centuries; by Genoese, Piacentine, and Florentine merchants who had assumed the
primary financial risks in colonizing the Portuguese Azores and Madeiran islands, and
Spain's Canary Island group; by Italian factors and money lenders who had strung
their capital from Algiers and Ceuta in north Africa, to Elmina and Luanda on the west
coast of that continent, and east to the Moluccas and Nagasaki; and by an Italian
bourgeoisie whose financial and technical character and business affairs had become
totally assimilated to the interests of the Spanish and Portuguese states and their most
Whether Columbus was the extraordinary seaman that
adventurous aristocracie~.~~
Samuel Eliot Morison has persisted in making him,53whether his obsessive personality and religious zeal were so compelling as to have cast a spell over Isabella and her
religious advisers,54are all of secondary significance to the single fact of his origins and
the legacy to which he was heir as a Genoese. This was the structural means of his
accomplishment: the two-centuries-long apogee of Genoese influence in Spain and
P o r t ~ g a lThus,
. ~ ~ when Columbus and the others with him (and those who followed)
came face to face with the Arawaks, the Tainos, the Aztecs, the Mayans, the Quechuas,
and all the other inhabitants of the western hemisphere, it was this complex mixture of
feudal authority and privilege, comingled with the appetites of emergent merchant
capitalism, national ambitions, and missionary compulsions that stood at their backs.

African Labor as Capital

The use of slave labor in the New World of the sixteenth century by the Spanish
Crown (and soon after the Portuguese) and its merchant concessionaires was conse-

A T L A N T I C SLAVE TRADE A N D A F R I C A N LABOR

109

quently a most natural step. Slave labor had been a basis for colonial trade in the
Mediterranear~,~~
Africa, and the Indies; it was already the foundation of colonization
in the Canaries, the Azores, and the Madeiran islands. At first, the relationship
between capitalism, colonization, and slave labor had appeared almost coincidental.
To some it still does. Philip Curtin, for example, has written:
The choice between freedom and slavery . . . depended on European institutions
and habits of mind. . . . One was the Mediterranean tradition of filling the gaps
between the demand and supply of people by importing alien slaves. The Venetians
used that device in their east Mediterranean colonies, where imported slave labor
played an important role in agricultural development in Crete, Cyprus, and Chios.
This institutional habitwas no doubt reinforced by the fact that Venice was a citystate, not a large territorial unit with abundant population resources to be mobilized and sent overseas as colonists.57
Notwithstanding Philip Curtin's rather casual language in describing the process, we
should remember that it was in Venice's affairs of trade that Oliver Cox situated "the
first capitalistically organized commerce in human beings."58Still, at first as we have
noted before, the slave trade had been more significant to Venetian commerce than
slave labor.
As Italian capitalism matured, however, this emphasis on trade was to change for
three reasons. Briefly, they were the expansion of the power of the Ottoman Turks in
the eastern Mediterranean in the fifteenth century, the extension of sugar-cane cultivation from Asia Minor to Cyprus, Sicily, and the Atlantic islands (Madeira, Cape
Verde, and the Azores) at the end of that century, and the collaboration of Genoese
capitalists with the ruling classes of Iberia. These events transformed the incidental
relationship between capitalism and slave labor into the very foundation of New
World e n t e r p r i ~ e . ~ ~
Madeira, as it turned out, was the physical and historical juncture where these
processes congealed. Sidney Greenfield observes:
[Wlith the introduction of sugar cane and its commercial success . . . Canary
Islanders and Moors-followed by Africans-as slaves, performed the necessary
physical labor that enabled the upwardly mobile settlers of Madeira to develop
a life style, derived from the tradition of the continental nobility but based upon
the physical efforts of slaves producing commercial crops for sale on the markets
of the continent, that characterized the emerging social institution of the slave
plantati~n.~~
The "Admiral of the Ocean Sea" was the embodied connective. Columbus, a son of
Genoa, an agent of the Spanish Crown, an ambitious merchant who had married into
one of the families of lesser Portuguese nobility which had acquired its new wealth
from the early colonization of Madeira and the cultivation of sugar there, and the
founder of Spain's Caribbean colonies had also brought sugar to the New World.61In
England, where envy of Spain's monopoly was tempered by the Spanish Empire's
110 ROOTS OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

seapower for at least the next century and a half, it was all said quite simple. Columbus's "West Indies" became known by English merchants as the "Sugar island^."^^
However, for the time being-that is the better part of the sixteenth century-ItaloPortuguese enterprise dominated the European trade with the Atlantic coast of Africa. This meant that African labor for the colonial plantations of Sao Tome, Cape
Verde, the Azores, Madeira, and the West Indies, and the mines of New Spain and
Peru was supplied by these merchants. "Until 1570," Leslie Rout Jr. maintains in an
almost absolute consensus with other students of the trade, "the Portuguese had the
lucrative slave trade entirely to them~elves."~~
And as the colonies grew, so did their
"captives of just war." For Angola, as early as 1530, Jan
appetites for piezas de India~,6~
Vansina calculates, "the annual export figures were from four to five thousand slaves a
year-and if there were no more, this was due only to the lack of ships to carry
them."65No wonder Affonso, the Catholic king of the Kongo and collaborator in the
trade with the Portuguese Crown, had been shaken enough to write to his "partners"
in 1526: "There are many traders in all corners of the country. Every day people are
enslaved and kidnapped, even nobles, even members of the king's own family? It
seems the trade was already exceeding the boundaries of its commercial origins. Even
the conquest of Portugal by Spain in 1580 did not retard the acceleration of the trade.
Indeed, the Spanish left the trade to their Portuguese underlings to a d m i n i ~ t e rThat
.~~
relationship persisted until the Portuguese regained national independence in 1640.
By 1650, it is estimated that 500,000 Blacks were living in Spanish America. More than
220,000 Africans had been transported to the ports of Cartagena and Veracruz by
Portuguese merchants during the first 45 years (1595-1640) of their Spanish trade.
Enriqueta Vila writes:
It is undoubtedly the Portuguese era that marks the African ethnic influence in the
new continent. It was the Portuguese who, by creating a vast network of traders,
factors, and middlemen, and by profiting from the drop in the Indian population,
achieved a market capable of absorbing such enormous quantities. . . . I believe that the Portuguese period was a special era for the slave trade, which was
never repeated.'j8
"For Brazil," Inikori writes, "the first reliable census. . . in 1798. . . showed that there
were 1,988,000 negroes in that country by this time."69 (By the eighteenth century, of
course, Portugal's monopoly in the Atlantic slave trade had been superseded first by
the Netherlands, and was now the business of the merchants and ruling classes of
England and France.)
T h e Ledgers o f a World System

The historiography of the Atlantic slave trade is immense and is still growing. Consequently, at least the outlines of the trade and the characteristics of those economies
and societies that required slave labor are fairly well known. In any case, even the
barest review of the literature would entail volumes in its own right and perhaps
A T L A N T I C SLAVE TRADE A N D A F R I C A N LABOR

III

deflect us from our primary purpose here, to ascertain the material, social, and
ideological foundations for the emergence of a Black radical tradition. Our attention,
then, will be centered on the work that most directly bears on this problem.
The significance of African labor for the development and formation of the commercial and industrial capitalist systems can be only partially measured by numbers.
This is the case because, first, the numbers we have are questionable, but more
disconcerting, the relationship between the growth of capitalism and slave labor has
persistently been in dispute. At least'one influential "school" of historiography has
denied this relationship, challenging the volume of the slave trade, its profitability,
and in some instances even arguing for the benevolence of the trade and slavery. As
Roderick McDonald puts it, "The shadows of Adam Smith and Ulrich B. Phillips
loom large and dark over the profitability question, and their perspectives continue
profoundly to influence the debate070Still it is not quite the case, as McDonald terms
it, that "you pays your money and you takes your pick."
With respect to the volume of the piezas de Indias transported to the New World,
Philip Curtin's work is at the center of the storm. In 1969, Curtin authoritatively
calculated that between 1451 and 1870,9,566,000African workers were brought to the
Western Hemisphere. He further concluded that "it is extremely unlikely that the
This
ultimate total will turn out to be less than 8,000,ooo or more than 10,500,ooo."~~
significantly lowered the figure most commonly used, 50,000,000. In 1976, however,
I. E. lnikori published a critique of Curtin that took him to task for the casualness of
his methodological and statistical computations, his shallow historicity and, in a
subsequent debate, for the peculiarities of his logic and ideology.72Inikori's argument
related to slave population and slave import figures in the Americas; slave smuggling
and the inaccuracy of official slave export data in Portuguese African territories
(Angola and Mozambique); understatement by the customs records of the volume
and value of commodities employed by English merchants in the purchase of slaves
on the African coast, as well as the number or tonnage of shipping employed.73
Inikori's treatment of customs records, contemporary censuses of slave populations,
descriptions of population fluctuations due to epidemic and the varying conditions
of work, and the studies of Eltis, Anstey, Daget, Peytraud, and Davis, would appear to
support an upward revision of Curtin's figures by at least ~ne-third.~*
A preliminary
summation of Inikori's figures for only the major periods of the slave trade comes to
15,399,572.~~
Still, whatever the actual number was, the volume of the trade was
enormous. The work of Inikori, McDonald, D. R. Murray, and others, however, serves
to underscore dramatically Curtin's remark that before the nineteenth century the
number of Africans crossing the Atlantic each year exceeded that of E ~ r o p e a n s . ~ ~
Moreover, as we shall see momentarily, the relative decline of European colonists to
African populations from the end of the seventeenth century-and in some instances
the decline of the Europeans was absolute-may have helped to confuse the issue of
the profitability of the slave system.
With respect to the significance of African labor for the development of European112 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

directed economies on both sides of the Atlantic, the literature again is substantial.
We have already noted Marx's assessment in his letter to Annenkov in 1846, and his
later treatment of the same issue in the first volume of Capital. For Marx, slavery had
been "the chief momenta of primitive accumulation," "an economic category of the
highest importance."'' First, African workers had been transmuted by the perverted
canons of mercantile capitalism into property. Then, African labor power as slave
labor was integrated into the organic composition of nineteenth-century manufacturing and industrial capitalism, thus sustaining the emergence of an extra-European
world market within which the accumulation of capital was garnered for the further
development of industrial production.
Marx, however, was not the first to recognize the existence of a relationship between Britain's economic growth and the business in slaves. Williams reminded us
that in eighteenth-century Liverpool, "the red brick Customs House was blazoned
with Negro heads."78 In 1788, to Bristol, which had preceded Liverpool in the slave
trade, "The West Indian trade was worth . . . twice as much as all her other overseas
commerce combined."79Even contemporary English writers were prescient enough
to match the signs and lexicon of the streets. In 1839 at Oxford, Herman Merivale had
anticipated Marx when he lectured:
We speak of the blood-cemented fabric of the prosperity of New Orleans or the
Havanna: let us look at home. What raised Liverpool and Manchester from provincial towns to gigantic cities? What maintains now their ever active industry and
their rapid accumulation of wealth? The exchange of their produce with that raised
by the American slaves; and their present opulence is as really owing to the toil and
suffering of the negro, as if his hands had excavated their docks and fabricated their
steam-engines. Every trader who carries on commerce with those countries, from
the great house which lends its name and funds to support the credit of the
American Bank, down to the Birmingham merchant who makes a shipment of
shackles to Cuba or the coast of Africa, is in his own way an upholder of slavery:
and I do not see how any consumer who drinks coffee or wears cotton can escape
from the same sweeping charge.80
A century later, Eric Williams, as we have noted, made the point again. So, too, has
McDonald more recently:
Labour was the key to the development of the Americas; initially land was plentiful,
capital was available to "prime the pump," and labour was provided by African and
Afro-American slaves. The source of all value is labour; the value of the New World,
the fabulous wealth of St. Domingue, Brazil, Jamaica and Cuba, created by slaves,
was enjoyed not only by planters and in the colonies, but by the mother country. It
was reinvested, purchased power and position, and stimulated development in
commercial and industrial sphere^.^'
These assertions of Merivale, Marx, and McDonald, and the political economy of
Williams's analysis can be buttressed in a myriad of ways. One writer indicates that
A T L A N T I C SLAVE T R A D E A N D A F R I C A N LABOR

I13

quite early "England's colonies had begun to pay off, and by the middle of the
seventeenth century, of a population about five and a half million it is estimated that
about fifty thousand were at sea."s2 Moreover, the wealth of the plantations drew
together the commercial bourgeoisie and the state, implicating them in behaviors and
institutions entirely dependent on the existence of slavery and long-distance trade. In
Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands, France, and England, the immensity of the profits
to be made spawned extensive corruption as its tell-tale mark. The English and
French colonists and planters were slower than their Spanish, Portuguese, and Dutch
contemporaries to come to sugar but when they did-that is when tobacco ended its
reign of wealths3-they, too, displayed their venality. For one, the colonies had helped
to transform England into a bourgeois democracy with a capitalist and commercial
trading economy. At the end of the seventeenth century, mercantile elements of the
Christian nation had circumvented the religious prohibitions against usury, institutionalizing their financial freedom with the official establishment of the Bank of
England in 1694. The rise of the English bourgeoisie of course occasioned the beginnings of the overturning of English society. The leading members of this mercantile
clique had been associated with "republicanism, treason and Dutch connections" in
the previous decade. "This was exactly the background:' P. G. M. Dickson suggests,
"that contemporaries expected plans for a national bank to have."s4 In France, the
maritime bourgeoisie were forced into a much more dangerous game:
The slave-trade and slavery were the economic basis of the French Revolution. "Sad
irony of human history," comments Jaures. "The fortunes created at Bordeaux, at
Nantes, by the slave-trade, gave to the bourgeoisie that pride which needed liberty
and contributed to human emancipation." Nantes was the center of the slavetrade. . . . Nearly all the industries which developed in France during the eighteenth
century had their origin in goods or commodities destined either for the coast of
Guinea or for America . . . upon the success or failure of the traffic everything else
depended.85
The demonstration of the relationship between slavery and the development of Western Europe, however, need not end here.
One other sort of direct evidence respecting the profitability of slave labor can be
found in the later work of Richard Pares, a scholar who earlier on, McDonald reminds us, had questioned the relationship between capitalism and slavery.86Discussing the wealth of the planters themselves, Pares wrote in 1960:
The absentee sugar planters were, with the East India Nabobs, the most conspicuous rich men of their time. Other absentee planters were nothing to them. There
were some coffee and indigo absentees in France, but the tobacco planters of
Virginia and even the rice planters of Carolina could not afford to behave in
England like the sugar planters. They might go to England for their education but,
unlike the sugar planters, they returned home when it was over; for in Virginia and
Maryland, unlike the islands, life was tolerable and a real local patriotism came
114 R O O T S O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

more easily to the planters; besides, their estates were mostly too small to support
an absentee owner for the whole of his life. Yet they lived a luxurious life at home.87
Another clue, also drawn from Pares, was the source of the capital that edged planters
into the indebtedness for which they were notorious:
The money came, in the last resort, from the planters themselves. . . . The money
which was received from one planter was lent again, either to him or to another
planter. . . . Thus it was the planter who was paying, so to speak, for his own
enslavement. The profits ofthe plantations were the source which fed the indebtedness charged upon the plantations themselves. In this sense Adam Smith was
wrong: the wealth of the British West Indies did not all proceed from the mother
country; after some initial loans in the earliest period which merely primed the
pump, the wealth of the West Indies was created out of the profits of the West
Indies themselves, and, with some assistance from the British tax-payer, much of it
found a permanent home in Great Britain.88
Even the fabled decline of European merchants in the New World in the eighteenth
century provides little support to the thesis that the slave system was of marginal
economic significance to metropolitan development. Here again the later Pares intervenes. He maintains that the explanation of this phenomenon lies both in K. G. B.
Davies's assertion that the merchants had been displaced by planters engaged in
entrepreneurship and the fact that Europeans were being displaced by Africans. "As
the white populations diminished in most of the British islands, and were replaced by
slaves who were hardly allowed to consume anything, the market for European goods
must have fallen off quite considerably. (Incidentally, this reduction in the number of
their customers helps to account for the decline of the class of resident merchant^.)"^^
Finally, one might add the testimony of contemporaries. The comments come from
widely different moments in the business of slavery but their sources, their specifics,
and their timing all describe the enthusiasm with which the system of slavery was
undertaken. From the archives of the first "large-scale introduction of Africans" into
the New World, Vila discovers:
In a report about the asientos taken to the Junta in 1612 it was affirmed that, should
the trade be lost, not only would the income produced by it be lost, but also the
sales tax (alcabala) and the export-import tax (averia) on the money that arrived
from the Indies. . . . Moreover the buying and selling of slaves was one of the most
important and lucrative sources of the Alcabala~.~~
Almost 200 years later, on 20 February 1793 to be exact, Bryan Edwards wrote to
Henry Dundas from Jamaica:
Our harbours are full of Guineymen [African slave ships], yet the price keeps up
enormously. Mr. Shirley gave £loo a head for a pick of 20 Koromantees out of a
ship of Mr. Lindo's, and so long as the notion continues that the trade will be
abolished, people will buy at any price, even to their own ruin, and the destruction
A T L A N T I C SLAVE T R A D E A N D A F R I C A N L A B O R

115

of half the negroes, for want of provisions. (Meaning that the planters are not in
general provided with sufficient means to support so great an influx of newly
imported negroes on a sudden.)91
From whatever vantage point one chooses, the relationship between slave labor, the
slave trade, and the weaving of the early capitalist economies is apparent. Whatever
were the alternatives, the point remains: historically, slavery was a critical foundation
for capitalism.
The Column Marked "British Capitalism"

We may now have sufficient grounds for saying that in the New World, the British (and French) entrepreneurs-following the models provided by the Portuguese,
Spanish, and the Dutch-substantially substituted human capital for commodities in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. We will follow this British trade for the
moment because it seems the best documented, because it so firmly seats slavery in
the movement from mercantile to industrial capitalism, and because many of the
clearest tracings of a Black radical tradition lead back to it.
To be sure, the leaders of the colonizing efforts of Britain had begun by exporting those colonized peoples to whom they had immediate access, that is the Irish.
We have already made mention of that fact as well as the collateral uses of labor
from Germany and Great Britain itself. It appears that the earliest investors in the
colonies-lord proprietors, politicians, and merchants according to Pares-had economic designs that at first could be met by a modest labor pool. As independent
venturers, the landed rich seemed most frequently to anticipate that their colonies
would produce an income resembling in form the manorial dues to which they were
accustomed in England.92 The joint companies, in which some lords along with
merchant and public representatives of the bourgeoisie also took an interest, were
typically more trade oriented. These companies were promoted for the colonial
cultivation of cotton, tobacco, indigo, ginger, and the production of extractive industries such as timber, glass, iron, and precious metals.93Thus, until the arrival of
sugar in the early i64os, and the development of large plantations, labor was adequately supplied by Europeans: indentured peasants, political outcasts produced
at varying times by national and civil wars, and poor or orphaned females (only some
of whom possessed "bad reputation^").^^ As Richard B. Moore reiterates, their lots
were oppressive:
Somewhat less onerous [than African slavery], but still quite oppressive, was the
system of indentured slavery of Europeans, forced in one way or another into the
colonies whether on the mainland or in the islands. Writing of this, the Jesuit
priest, Joseph J. Williams, relates how Irish peasants were "hunted down as men
hunt down game, and were forcibly put on board ship, and sold to the planters of

barb ado^."^"

116

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

Between 1624 and 1634, tobacco became the main staple of the colonies, earning in
that period profits that attracted more and more English and French planters to it. By
the end of this period, a glut of tobacco had hit the market and prices declined. The
resultant long depression of the late 1630s and early 1640s compelled the search for a
new staple, despite the lingering expectations that tobacco would recover.y6In England, an additional strain was being generated: "harried by depression and the ever
growing threat of civil war, Englishmen left their homeland in such numbers during
the 1630s that their exodus was called the 'Great Migration,' "97 Batie tells us. Many of
these newcomers settled in the West Indies, and particularly Barbados, which only
made the attempt to locate a substitute for tobacco more desperate. The cunning of
history then intervened, cutting off Europe's supply of New World sugar as one result
of the wars for the possession of Brazil between the Spanish, the Portuguese, the
Dutch and the Luso-Brazilian~.~~
The cultivation of sugar in the English colonies began consequently in the late
1630s. Once the techniques of sugar cultivation and refining were mastered, it rapidly
displaced the less profitable crops of tobacco, indigo, and ginger in the islands. With
the massive demands for labor that sugar production engendered, the appetite of
colonial production for labor increasingly outpaced supply. Having already decimated those aboriginal populations they had encountered in the West Indies, the
English mercantile and planter bourgeoisie found it necessary and expedient to expand their Irish (and homeland) strategy to West Africa. As they did so, the scale of
their enterprise grew beyond anything seen in English history.
During the seventeenth century as a whole, Curtin claims, 60 percent of the slave
trade in the New World "went to the Hispanic colonies."9yThis may, or may not have
been the case, since Curtin's figures have been shown to have a rather erratic authority
and accuracy. Here, at least, he has consistently maintained some caution (in the
wrong direction)loOand even, on occasion, admitted to error (again toward lessening
the numbers of Africans impressed into slavery).lolThe more immediate concern,
however, is that by the last quarter ofthat century, English merchants supplying slaves
primarily to the British Caribbean had surpassed the Portuguese and the Dutch, their
predecessors in the trade. Curtin's approximations reveal that while imports by the
Portuguese and Dutch merchants during the first half of the century exceeded the
English trade by a substantial margin (a combined 327,000 for the Dutch and Portuguese as compared to 20,700 for English traders), by the third quarter, the English
territories had overtaken the Spanish colonies in labor imports. By the last 25 years of
the seventeenth century, English merchants had more than doubled their performance in human trading for the previous quarter (69,000 for the earlier period versus 174,000) thereby besting their commercial c o n t e m p ~ r a r i e sThis
. ~ ~ ~achievement,
again, was largely due to the demands of sugar production.
By the end of the eighteenth century and the abolition of the legal British slave
trade in 1807, British factors, merchants, and traders alone were to account for the
transportation of 3,699,572 more Africans to the New World.lo3If we were to accept

A T L A N T I C SLAVE T R A D E A N D A F R I C A N L A B O R

I17

Curtin's argument concerning the levels of death in transit during this period, then
perhaps as many as 400,000 or more of these people never saw the western end of the
Atlantic.lo4They died "in transit," and thereby produced one profoundly tragic measure of the extent to which the development of the capitalist world system depended
on labor its metropolis could not produce.
The Africans were, however, not the only ones to be so unfortunately used in the
slave trade. The greed of the English and European merchants easily overran their
racial and national sympathies. Thus it was that the crews oftheir slaving ships died at
rates perhaps even higher than their human cargoes. In time, English seamen sang
about their fate in graphic terms:
Beware and take care
Of the Bight of Benin:
For one that comes out,
There are forty go in.lo5
After the i68os, Jamaica consistently began to exceed Barbados and the Leeward
Islands in sugar exports. By the early i7oos, Jamaica's slave population followed suit,
reflecting the island's preeminent role in British colonial commerce. By the end of the
English trade in slaves, something like 38 percent of the slave labor force transported
by English shippers had been relocated to Jamaica.loh
In almost equal parts, the origins of these Africans had been along the routes that
fed into the slave ports at the Bight of Biafra, the Gold Coast, Central Africa, the Bight
of Benin, and Sierra Leone. This ethnic distribution, however, was not the result of
consistent or regular patterns of recruitment. Initially, Orlando Patterson concludes,
the predominant groups were the "Coromantees" (Kormantin was a port about 70
miles west of Accra), the Akan, and Ga-Andangme peoples. After 1675, and for the
rest of the century, the British trade for Jamaica shifted to Angola and the Ewespeaking peoples of Dahomey. Between 1700 and 1730, the Slave Coast and Ghana
became the favorite sources only to be succeeded themselves in the years between 1730
and 1760 by the Niger and Cross deltas. At the end of the eighteenth century, the
Congo once again became the dominant region, followed successively by the Niger
and Cross deltas, the Gold Coast and (by a much smaller order) the Windward
Coast.lo7
In many ways the Jamaican trade followed a pattern established by the European
mercantile predecessors of the English. They, too, had deposited the majority of their
African labor in the islands of the Greater and Lesser Antilles. Both tobacco and sugar
had something to do with this since the islands possessed the ideal climate for the
production of these crops. The Portuguese, with the lush tropical fertility of their
Brazilian territories, had been the exception-an exception that Curtin maintains accounted for approximately 38 percent of the total number of African peoples brought
to the New World.lo8
To the North American colonies it can be estimated that the British merchants sent
approximately 20 percent of their slave cargoes in the eighteenth century. Surprisll8

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

ingly, perhaps, to many present-day North Americans, this amounted to less than 5
percent of the total number of Africans brought to the New World by European
merchants. Curtin's best estimate is that 399,000 Africans were brought to the English
colonies during the entirety of the slave trading period (another 28,000, he suggests,
came to the continent by way of French traders supplying the Louisiana region).Io9
Inikori, however, warns us that "meaningful import estimates for the United States
are yet to be made.""O This African population, however, differed from that distributed in Jamaica in that at least a quarter of these peoples had originated from
Angolan ports. Nearly as many came from the Bight of Biafra, half as many from the
Gold Coast and Senegambia, followed by ever decreasing proportions from the ports
of Sierra Leone, the Bight of Benin, and Central Africa.I1l
In South Carolina, Blacks made up 60 percent of the colony's population in the
eighteenth century. In Virginia, the comparable figure was 40 percent. They were
used as laborers on the tobacco farms, and, later, on the cotton plantations, but they
also worked "in mines, salt- and rope-works; and they trained as shipwrights, blacksmiths, and as various kinds of woodworkers, including carpenters, coopers, wheelwrights, and sa~yers.""~
Those who were imported directly from Africa were termed
"outlandish" to distinguish them from what their masters called the "new negroes" of
the fields and the supposed deracinated, acculturated artisan slaves with whom they
were more "comfortable." As Gerald Mullin has demonstrated, these distinctions
were for the colonists practical considerations:
In sample runs of the South Carolina Gazette in the early 1750s and 1771 there was
clear evidence of tribal cooperation in advertisements for the return of four "new
Gambia men"; three Angolans, "all short fellows"; six other Angolans . . . and four
men from the "Fullah Country."l13
The invention of the Negro was proceeding apace with the growth of slave labor.
Somewhat paradoxically, the more that Africans and their descendants assimilated
cultural materials from colonial society, the less human they became in the minds of
the colonists. Just as instructive, the rebels among these Africans and "negroes" were
described as "runaways," a term that has endured in the historiography of the period.
It should be remembered, however, that it was from the efforts of men and women
such as these that the Black settlements of Virginia's piedmont and the Afro-Creek
"Exiles of Florida" (the Seminoles) would consist.l14 In similar fashion, the maroon
peoples of the Caribbean and South America would be formed. They were as well, at
the end of the eighteenth century, among the estimated 55,000 who fled to the British
forces and the loyalist settlements when the colonists pursued the logic of the fear of
their own enslavement to the point of revolution.l15
Still, enough of the African laborers remained in the colonies of North America
and the Indies to play a significant role in the development of the English imperial
economy. The "triangular trade" in slaves, as Eric Williams asserted, broadened the
"home market" by stimulating the production of British manufactures that English
merchants exchanged in Africa for Black workers. Once in place, these workers
A T L A N T I C SLAVE T R A D E A N D A F R I C A N LABOR

119

formed the labor for British tropical production, craft work, and extractive industries. The end result was capital accumulation for the advance of productive forces in
England and Europe (the Industrial Revolution), for the growth of staple industries
in northern America (fisheries, food crops, etc.), for timber, ship-building, and textiles, and for the expansion of colonization and settlement. The concomitant, however, was the degradation of these African peoples and their social institutions when
touched by that trade, and, as Walter Rodney has argued, the underdevelopment of
Africa's economies.116
This trade, this movement of Black workers, though, did not end with slavery's
legal termination in the nineteenth century. Leopold's Congo, Harry Johnston's Central Africa, Cecil Rhodes's southern Africa, Lugard's West Africa, Portuguese Africa,
and French Africa as well as the New World's slave descendants all contributed to the
further development of the capitalist world system. As peasants, as tenant farmers, as
migrant laborers, as day laborers, as domestic servants, and as wage labor, their
expropriation extended into the present century. Even in the destruction of the means
of production, the wars that Marx and Engels had stipulated as inevitable in capitalism, Black labor was pressed into service.l17 They were exempt from no aspect of
exploitation.

120 ROOTS OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

ogy and metaphysics, of habits, beliefs, and morality. These were the actual terms of
their humanity. These cargoes, then, did not consist of intellectual isolates or deculturated Blacks-men, women, and children separated from their previous universe.
African labor brought the past with it, a past that had produced it and settled on it the
first elements of consciousness and comprehension.
This was the embryo of the demon that would be visited on the whole enterprise of
primitive accumulation. It would be through the historical and social consciousness
of these Africans that the trade in slaves and the system of slave labor was infected
with its contradiction. Much later, in the midst of the struggle against Portuguese
imperialism in Guinea-Bissau in this century, Amilcar Cabral would reveal the nature
of that contradiction:
[Ilmperialist domination, by denying the historical development of the dominated
people, necessarily also denies their cultural development. It is. . . understood why
imperialist domination, like all other foreign domination, for its own security,
requires cultural oppression and the attempt at direct or indirect liquidation of the
essential elements of the culture of the dominated people. . . . [I]t is generally
within the culture that we find the seed of opposition.'
The transport of African labor to the mines and plantations of the Caribbean and
subsequently to what would be known as the Americas meant also the transfer of
African ontological and cosmological systems; African presumptions of the organization and significance of social structure; African codes embodying historical
consciousness and social experience; and African ideological and behavioral constructions for the resolution of the inevitable conflict between the actual and the
normative. Michael Craton grasps this when he recounts that:
their African peasant roots clearly predisposed all slaves to regard plantation agriculture as being as unnatural as the institution which sustained it. From the earliest days, runaway slaves settled around provision grounds (called "polinks" in
the English colonies, "palenques" in the Spanish), worked in a manner owing
something to African farming, something to the conuco agriculture of the Amerindians. . . .
More deeply, the slaves retained and developed concepts of family and kin quite
beyond the comprehension and control of the master class, and a concept of land
tenure that was in contradiction to that of the dominant European culture. . . .
They wanted to live in family units, to have ready access to land of their own, and
be free to develop their own culture, particularly their own, syncretized religion.
These were the basic aspirations, which varied according to the different conditions in each of the colonies affected [by rebellion] .*
These were the terms upon which the response of the enslaved to the slave system
would be grounded.

122 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

History and the Mere Slave

But even to those unfamiliar with the histories of enslaved Africans, it should come as
no surprise that these African peoples responded to slavery in several ways. In the
North American slave experience, particularly with respect to the nineteenth century,
the attempts to portray the "slave personality type," to identify a "plantation typen-a
notion already firmly in place by the time the system produced its most celebrated
post hoc apologist, Ulrich Bonnell Phillips-had as their results a veritable stock
company of characters. John Blassingame, a recent contributor to a literature that has
ranged from the observations of eighteenth and nineteenth centuries travelers and
sometimes equally peripatetic abolitionists, plantation records, and memorabilia,
"slave testimony:' contemporary novels, and conventional historiography, has made a
good effort to organize its depictions of the slave laborer^.^ He enumerated the masks,
the posturings, and the more naked affects the African workers and their descendants
displayed: the vain house servant, frequently wearing the airs and the clothes of those
who owned the "house" and who made similar claims on the slave workers. The
"Sambo:' the docile, submissive, terrorized individual, broken by the omniscience of
psychological and physical pain-often such men and women grew increasingly indifferent to the specter of punishment and suffering, both that of others and themselves. Separation, the trauma of realization that one had neither the right nor the
power to resist what must have seemed so often to be the arbitrary or cruel removal
from those who really mattered, too, registered its own particular marks:
Angry, despondent, and overcome by grief, the slaves frequently never recovered
from the shock of separation. Many became morose and indifferent to their work.
Others went insane, talked to themselves, and had hallucinations about their loved
ones. A few slaves developed suicidal tenden~ies.~
Others, still further along the path of "distraction," came to accept the assertion of the
sanctity of whiteness and the shame of blackness. But Blassingame was convinced by
contemporary testimony and observation that for the majority of the enslaved (the
"fieldhands") the oppressivenessof the system compelled social rather than psychological fetters. For the most part, the slave laborers were "sullenly obedient and hostilely
submissive," according to Blassingame. He contends:
Having a variety of relationships, besides that with his master, the slave was able to
preserve his self-esteem in spite of the cruel punishment he received. The docility
of the slave was a sham, a mask to hide his true feelings and personality trait^.^
Blassingame would conclude-too casually we will suggest-that " [tlhe same range of
personality types existed in the quarters as in the man~ion."~
Leslie Howard Owens, another Black historian, exhibited even fewer reservations
than Blassingame on the naturalness of rebelliousness within the domination of the
American slave structure. Where Blassingame hedges, apparently conceding to the

HISTORICAL A R C H A E O L O G Y OF THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

123

dichotomies frequently encountered in the literature on American slavery between
"house slaves," and "field slaves,''' between the "cruel master" (redundancy) and the
"benevolent mastern8(contradiction), Owens asserted simply: "That slaves were discontented with their bondage is overwhelmingly documented by manuscript and
narrative material^."^ For Owens, then, rebelliousness was situational, its context the
slave system.1° Tracing what he termed the "logic of resistance:' Owens noted among
the slave workers the multiplicity of their responses to domination: the broken and
misplaced tools, the burning of crops, the work slowdowns, the assistance and protection afforded to "runaways," stealing, flight, the forming of short-lived maroon
communities, even self-mutilation and suicide.I1 Ultimately, of course, there was
insurrection. The existential constancy of the slave system with its inevitable demonstrations and exercises of the collective and individual wills of the master class had as
their result the persistence of attacks upon the system. "Suppression of minor and
serious slave disturbances by the slave regime did not erase slave disobedience for
long,"12 Owens remarks. The slave system generated its own maelstrom. Aside from
this dialectic, it seems, nothing else was fixed or static, certainly not the personalities
in which the enslaved "publicly" dressed themselves: "some recognition of the slave's
shifting rather than static identity is important to understanding why sometimes very
little separated his minor acts of disobedience from his serious acts or threats of
rebellion."13 Most disturbing of all, perhaps, to the master class was the monstrous
deception lying behind the Black docility it so desperately desired: "That there was
some docility among slaves need not be denied. But it was not the norm. Masters and
authorities repeatedly linked seemingly docile slaves to acts of resistance."14 The
psychological dividends for those who commanded the system were drawn from
necessary vigilance: fear and paranoia, moral degeneration, and finally, according to
some historians, a failure of wi11.15
Still, it is useful to pause here for a moment to consider what revisionists such as
Blassingame and Owens and a score of other historians, Black and non-Black, in the
past twenty years or so, have taken to be the issue.I6 Clearly, they have addressed
themselves to one overriding claim: that the enslaved in time came to accept the terms
of slavery. 'The practice of submission, so went the conventional wisdom embodied in
the American disciplines of history, sociology, and psychology, became for the slaves
the habits of inferiority; for their descendants, the psychological "marks of oppression,'' the culture of the dominated, the perverted, twisted familial structures of
matriarchy and matrilocality (notice, if you will, how often the violation of the slave is
referred to as "emasculation," "castration," etc.). The American revisionists in the
main have sought to refute the tradition deposited in their national record and
consciousness that Blacks became slaves, finally. They have chosen to come to terms
with the reiterated public fantasy that the subsequent generations of "native sons"
were fatally marked culturally and emotionally by the accommodations effected by
their forebears. The American revisionists have attempted to supply academic substance to the insistence of their own generations that the material, political, and social
circumstances of Blacks in the twentieth century are not the consequences of private
124 R O O T S O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

or even collective psychopathologies among Blacks. They have transformed this African people into human beings capable of judgment, injury, accommodation and
heroism. In short, a people possessing, as Blassingame put it, "the same range."
To this point, their project has been successfully executed. The scholarship, the
narratives, the documents speak for themselves in a stridently eloquent way. Still this
"political" triumph is but a partial one, for the defense of the slaves addresses its
antagonists in their terms. Expectedly, in a post-slave society where the historical
victory of the enslaved stratum was incomplete, the question of the humanity of the
enslaved people would linger. It would, it follows, have to be spoken to. We now
"know" what the master class certainly knew but for so long publicly denied only to
be confronted with the truth in its nightmares, its sexual fantasies, and rotting social
consciousness: the enslaved were human beings.17 But the more authentic question
was not whether the slaves (and the ex-slaves and their descendants) were human. It
was, rather, just what sort of people they were . . . and could be. Slavery altered the
conditions of their being, but it could not negate their being. Long before the troubled American republic of the nineteenth century even became a possibility, a part of
the answer began its unfolding. As we shall soon see, its historical imprint is still clear.
Reds, Whites, a n d Blacks

African labor in the Western hemisphere became necessary only when native labor
was exhausted and European labor became evidently inadequate.
Apparently, it took no longer than the period between Columbus's first and third
voyages (1497) for the Spanish government to recognize and respond to the special
problems it faced in depending upon its nationals for supplemental colonial labor. In
June 1497, "a general order was issued to all justices in Spain authorizing the transportation to Hispaniola of criminals-with the exception of heretics, traitors, counterfeiters, and sodomites-in commutation of death or prison sentences."18 This
supply proving inadequate, the crown successively and contemporaneously resorted
to white slavery (1504, 1512, i521), foreign immigrants (1526), and inducing nonCastilian Spanish emigration (1511) as the shortage of Indian labor became more
acute in the West Indies.19 Nevertheless, by the mid-sixteenth century, Iberian capitalists had come to understand something that their English successors would only need
to take to heart a hundred years later: the production of sugar required a labor force
that was larger and more politically and morally unencumbering than Europe could
supplyz0At least in the beginning, the alternative had been the "Indian."
"It has been said of the Spanish conquistadors," Eric Williams was to write, "that
first they fell on their knees, and then they fell on the aborigine^."^' From the first, it
would seem, Columbus had little else in mind for these "wild people." The repartimiento de Indios (the division of Indians for tasks necessary to the colonial settlements) of Columbus and his immediate successor, Francisco de Bobadilla, became
the encomienda in the hands of the third governor of the Indies, Nicolas de Ovando.
C. H. Haring details:
HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

I25

The Indians were assigned in lots of fifty, a hundred, or more, by written deed or
patent, to individual Spaniards to work on their farms and ranches or in the placer
mines for gold dust. Sometimes they were given to officials or to parish priests in
lieu of part of their annual salary. The effect was simply to parcel out the natives
among the settlers to do with as they pleased.22
The consequences of their exploitation were dramatic:
The results are to be seen in the best estimates that have been prepared of the trend
of population in Hispaniola. These place the population in 1492 at between 200,000
and 300,000. By 1508 the number was reduced to 60,000; in 1510 Oviedo doubted
whether five hundred Indians of pure stock remained. In 1570 only two villages
survived of those about whom Columbus had assured his sovereigns, less than
eighty years before, that "there is no better nor gentler people in the
Still the West Indies was only the beginning.
In Mexico, or New Spain (Nueva Espana) as it was then called, the native population has been estimated by Sherburne Cook and Woodrow Borah to have been 25
million or more at the beginning of the sixteenth century.24Whatever the true figure,
this aboriginal population would become the object of a most intensive exploitation
by its Spanish conquerors. Chilam Balam, a native of the Yucatan, recalling the days of
the pre-Conquest, would write:
There was then no sickness; they had no aching bones; they had then no high fever;
they had then no smallpox; they had then no burning chest; they had then no
abdominal pain; they had then no consumption; they had then no headache. At
that time the course of humanity was orderly. The foreigners made it otherwise
when they arrived here.25
The world for which Chilam displayed such poetic nostalgia ended quickly. Within
nine decades "diseases, wars, relocations, and the ecological changes wrought by
Spanish settlement and control"26 and (it should be added) slave labor had reduced
the number of indigenous inhabitants to an estimated 1,075,ooo.~~
The Conquest had
an even more insidious effect. As early as the 1514 census, according to C. 0 . Sauer, the
repartimiento records of natives on Santo Domingo, working land seized for the
crown, indicated an average of less than one child per family. Las Casas had indicated
that in the period immediately prior to the Conquest, Indian women had averaged
between three and five children each. Elsewhere, "Jaramillo Uribe remarks that at the
beginning of the seventeenth century it was common in New Granada to find that
half the Indian couples had no children. On the average they had only two children,
and the family with four offspring was exceptional." Sanchez-Albornoz concludes: "It
is evident that the Indians decreased not only on account of deaths, but also partially
because they did not ensure the normal replacement of the generation^."^^ This
decimation of the "Indian" population, rather than the controversial royal decrees of
1542 (the Nuevas Leyes) that "prohibited the further enslavement of Indians except as
116 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

punishment for rebellion against Spanish rule:' resulted in a significant demand for
additional labor toward the second half of the sixteenth century.29Ultimately, the
source of that labor was to be the west coast of Africa.
Not unexpectedly, Las Casas, whose bitter charges against the conquistadors and
whose calculations of the terrifying numbers of Indian deaths had done much toward
obtaining the New Laws from Charles V, assumed full responsibility. He wrote of
himself in his Historia general de las Indias: "The priest Las Casas was the first to
suggest that one should introduce Africans to the West Indies. He did not know what
he was doing."30 It was, however, he would continue to maintain, a somewhat understandable error:
In the old days, before there were any ingenios, we used to think in this island that,
if a Negro were not hanged, he would never die, because we had never seen one die
of illness, and we were sure that, like oranges, they had found their habitat, this
island being more natural to them than Guinea. But after they were put to work in
the ingenios, on account of the excessive labor they had to endure, and the drinks
they take made from cane syrup, death and pestilence were the result, and many of
them died.31
Las Casas, of course, had miscast himself in the drama and tragedy of Indian and
African enslavement. It was an old tactic of his. Though not entirely innocent of guilt
in this matter, he was only a link in the chains fastened around the necks of the
enslaved. But as the son of an Andalusian aristocratic family, he was better placed
than most to understand that his appeal to the Emperor on behalf of the Indian had
to flatter the imperial ego as well as shock the imperial morality. Charles V of Spain
was much more implicated in "the devastation of the Indies" than Las Casas thought
it prudent to review. Hans Magnus Enzensberger captures the situation exactly:
Of course Las Casas was completely aware that the Spanish crown was totally
dependent on the income from the colonies. One year before the audience [1519]
the Augsburg business firm Welser had financed the election of Charles V, and his
dependency on the banks was notorious everywhere in Europe. Las Casas . . .
charged that the conquistadors' violent behavior had cost the King many hundred
thousand crowns year after year. . . . This line of argument. . . certainly must have
made more of an impression on Charles V than all the theological and legal reasons
that Las Casas brought to bear.32
It would still take Las Casas twenty more years to win this victory for his charges.
Altogether, it is written, he would make 14 trips between the Old and New Worlds
during this time pursuing his mission (several of these trips were command performances since he was forced to return to Spain to answer accusations of treason). In
the end, his victory would be short and meaningless. Charles V revoked the New Laws
three years after their a p p e a r a n ~ eThe
. ~ ~ natives of the conquered lands were already a
vanishing presence. The survival of New Spain's economy was already being transferred to new hands.34
H I S T O R I C A L A R C H A E O L O G Y O F T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

I17

Black for Red

David Davidson argues that: "It is now fairly certain that in the period 1519-1650 the
area [New Spain] received at least 120,000 slaves, or two-thirds of all the Africans
imported into the Spanish possessions in A m e r i ~ a . "Enriqueta
~~
Vila's more recent
studies, as we have already seen, confirm Davidson's impressions while substantially expanding the total number of transported A f r i ~ a n s The
. ~ ~ colonial industries of sugar and cloth production, and later of the silver mines, were the primary
sites to which African labor was assigned. As Indian labor atrophied during the
second half of the century in consequence of its unnatural declines or legal restrict i o n ~and
~ ~the settlers "stumbled upon the richest silver mines in the
African workers began their domination of the labor of the plantations and the
mines. By 1570, Mexico contained over 20,000 Africans; by 1650, their numbers were
believed to be closer to 35,000-by then, what amounted to a supplement to the more
than ioo,ooo Afromestizoes of Black-Indian parentage. Again, by this latter period,
Davidson states, 8,000-10,000 Africans could be found working the sugar plantations
and cattle ranches in the eastern region around the coastal lowlands between Veracruz
and Panuco and the slopes of the Sierra Madre Oriental; another 15,000 were absorbed by the silver mines and ranches of the regions north and west of Mexico City;
3,000-5,000 were bound to similar industries located between Puebla and the Pacific
coast; and 20,000 to 50,000 employed in urban occupations in Mexico City and the
valley of Mexico.39By the beginnings of the nineteenth century, Gonzalo Aguirre
Beltran states, the descendants of these workers, who by then were classified in rough
terms as Blacks, mulattos, and zambos (Afro-Indians), were reported by the 1810 census at 634,461, a little more than a tenth of the Mexican p o p ~ l a t i o n . ~ ~
There is, however, much more to be understood of their presence in Mexico and
the Spanish colonies of the Indies and South America than their mere numbers.
The systematic transportation of Black labor to the New World had not always been
an obvious or requisite step. For a few decades, as we have seen, it had not seemed
necessary at all. When it did begin, it almost completely overturned the more casual application of Iberian racial structures that had already been transferred to
the colonies.
In the beginning, that is, most probably in the decade that ended the fifteenth
century but most certainly in the one that began the sixteenth, small groups of
enslaved Africans had come to the New World as "companions" of the conquistad o r ~When
. ~ ~ Nicolas de Ovando took up his governorship of Hispaniola in 1502, his
company included "an unknown number of black and mulatto servitor^."^^ They
were ladinos, Hispanicized Blacks, but within the year Ovando requested of his queen
that she prevent all future arrivals of such people.
He reported that those already on the island had been a source of scandal to the
Indians, and some had fled their owners and established, independent settlements

128 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

in the mountains. Concerned that the Indians might be led from the path of
Christian righteousness, Isabella immediately barred the shipment of l ~ d i n o s . ~ ~
The Queen of Castile, however, had provided only a short relief for ladino workers.
She died in 1504 and the colonies that had previously been exclusively administered by
Castile now came under the direction of her husband, Ferdinand of Aragon. Ferdinand, who at some point became convinced that "one black could do the work of four
Indians," informed Ovando that the threat of Black rebellion was offset by the need of
Black labor in the mines and plantation^.^^ From 1505 until 1522, ladino slaves increasingly replaced the native work force as the latter was decimated by the discipline
of the encomienda, disease, and demoralization. In the latter year, the policy prohibiting the import of ladinos was reinstituted. That policy was reiterated in 1530, 1532,
1543, 1550, and in the various assientos granted between 1595 and 1609. Henceforth,
only bozales-Africans obtained in Africa-were to be eligible for transport to the
New World.45We shall investigate the reasons behind this turn of fortune shortly.
A few ladinos, however, played less anonymous parts in the conquest of the New
World. Leslie Rout characterizes them as "compatriots." One, Nuflo de Olano, acAnother, Juan Garrido (Handsome John),
companied Balboa in 1513.~~
apparently crossed the atlantic as a freeman, participated in the siege of Tenochtitlan [i52i] and, in subsequent conquests and explorations, tried his hand as an
entrepreneur (with both Negro and Indian slaves of his own) in the early search for
gold, and took his place as a citizen in the Spanish quarter of Mexico City.47
Garrido, whose fortunes were entirely linked with those ofhis patron, Hernan Cortes,
died in poverty, a victim it is believed of the great plague that struck Mexico City in
1547.~~
Esteban (Estebanico) was with the less hardy Narvaez in Florida in 1528.
Having survived his master, he completed an eight-year trek from Florida to Mexico
City with three other conquistadors, only to perish at the hands of Zuni in 1538 while
acting as a guide for another master, Friar Marcos de N i ~ a Juan
. ~ ~Valiente accompanied Alvarado's army in its march from Guatemala to Peru in 1534. In 1536 and 1540,
Valiente fought with Valdivia's army against the Araucanian Indians in Chile. In 1546,
when Valdivia granted him an estate, and in 1548, Valiente became the first ladino to
receive an encomienda. Significantly enough, when he died in 1553 (killed in action
against the Arauca), his old master, Alonso Valiente had begun legal action to reclaim
him and any property he had amassed.50Other ladinos were to be found in the
entourages of Avila (1514),Narvaez (during his initial appearance in the New World in
1520), Alvarado (in his expeditionary force into Guatemala in i523), Montejo (in
Yucatan in i532), and Pizarro as well. Jose Franco reminds us, "the Spaniards frequently used Negroes and Indians as shock troops in their own internal wars."51 Still,
it seems they were as historically inconspicuous as the white slaves52who shared their
condition in the New World of the early sixteenth century. In economic terms,
however, theirs was the first phase that would lead ultimately to the placement of

H I S T O R I C A L A R C H A E O L O G Y O F T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

129

Africans in the Indies, Nueva Espana, Peru, Columbia, Chile, Venezuela, Argentina,
and Uruguay as domestics; growers of sugar, wheat, grapes, olives, cacao; miners of
gold and silver; craft workers (blacksmiths, cobblers, brick masons, carpenters, tailors); teamsters; cowboys; pearl divers; and p r o s t i t ~ t e s . ~ ~
Their consequences, though, were not simply economic. Slave labor required the
elaboration of systems of control and discipline. Moreover, the intercourse of the
several races extant in Spain's new possessions precipitated the formation of rather
complex racial codes and codifications. The results were practical while being barbaric and absurd:
In Spanish America the lash, the stock, detention, and deprivation were standard
means by which unruly and defiant slaves were kept in line. Some masters were
known to have whipped their bondmen to death, while others continued to mutilate their dusky properties with hot branding irons even after the crown had
prohibited this act. Worst of all were the vengeful sadists who made their slaves eat
excrement and drink urine.s4
Castration and the severing of other limbs were common and legal. Aguirre Beltran
reports that some slave mulattos who were no longer phenotypically distinct from the
ruling class had to be branded
with hot irons in places where the insignia of servitude could not for a moment be
hidden. The faces of many of them were completely covered with branded legends
saying: "I am the slave of Senor Marque del Valle," "I am the slave of Dona
Francisca Carrillo de Peralta."ss
Such treatment and the almost inevitably foul conditions in which most of them
labored reduced the active working lives of slaves to between ten and twenty years.s6
Black Resistance: The Sixteenth Century

At first, as a rule, resistance among the enslaved Africans took the form of flight to
native or "Indian" settlements. The notarial archive of the Mexican city of Puebla de
10s Angeles, for example, which is "virtually complete from 1540 on" is filled with the
official reaction to mid-sixteenth-century "r~naways."~~
Fugitives drew the attention
of Hernan Cortes as early as 1523 and the first general uprising in Nueva Espana is
thought to have occurred in 1537.~~
Some of these Africans, however, did not completely sever their contacts with the Spanish. Once freed by their own wits, they
returned to plague the Spanish colonists, appropriating food, clothes, arms, tools,
and even religious artifacts from the colonists' towns, their villages, and ranch homes,
and from travelers along the roads connecting the ports and settlements. Once they
(The
armed themselves, the Spanish would refer to these "fugitives" as cirnarrone~.~~
English would incorporate the term into their own language as "maroons.") In 1503,
we recall, Ovando had observed subversive activities among Hispaniola's ladinos. In
the last month of 1522, Ovando's prevision was realized. Fittingly enough, slaves on
130

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

the plantation of Diego Columbus (a son of the Admiral) revolted, killing some 15
colonists before they were themselves captured and executed.60This had been the
occasion for the prohibition of future employ of ladinos as slave labor in the colonies.
Similar revolts had occurred in Puerto Rico (1527), Santa Marta, Colombia (i529),
and Panama (1531). Back in Hispaniola, Blacks had joined the native uprising of 1533.
Resistance had continued for ten years.61Decades later, Spanish authorities continued
to be concerned about such events. Viceroy Martin Enriquez had written Philip 11:
[I]t appears, Our Majesty, that the time is coming when these people will have
become masters of the Indians, inasmuch as they were born among them and their
maidens, and are men who dare to die as well as any Spaniard in the world. But if
the Indians become corrupt and join with them, I do not know who will be in the
position to resist them. It is evident that this mischief will take place in several
years.'j2
Soon, however, the fugitive slaves grew numerous enough to begin the formation of
their own settlements, communities that came to be known in Mexico as palenques.
Edgar Love recalls Aquirre Beltran's estimate that by 1579 some 2,000 Blacks had
escaped from their masters. Love goes on to indicate that "[flor more than a century,
the escaped slave was a serious problem in many parts of Mexico."63David Davidson,
writing of the third quarter of the century, declares:
By the 1560s fugitive slaves from the mines of the north were terrorizing the regions
from Guadalajara to Zacatecas, allying with the Indians and raiding ranches. In one
case maroons from the mines of Guanajuato joined with unpacified Chichimec
Indians in a brutal war with the settlers. The viceroy was informed that they were
attacking travelers, burning ranches, and committing similar "misdeeds." To the
east, slaves from the Pachuca mines took refuge in an inaccessible cave from which
they sallied forth periodically to harass the countryside. Negroes from the Atotonilco and Tonavista mines joined them with arms, and created an impregnable
palenq~e.~~
The response ofthe representatives ofthe Spanish state was unequivocal. Between 1571
and 1574, royal decrees detailed new systems of control and surveillance, stipulating
progressively harsher treatment of fugitives: 50 lashes for four days absence; loo lashes
and iron fetters for more than eight days absence; death for those missing for six
months, commuted in some cases to castration.
Yet neither the code of 1571-1574 nor the issuance of restrictive legislation in the
1570s and 1580s was of any avail. A viceregal order of 1579 revealed that the contagion of revolt nearly covered the entire settled area of the colony outside of
Mexico City, in particular the provinces of Veracruz and Panuco, the area between
Oaxaca and Gualtuco on the Pacific coast, and almost the whole of the Gran
Chichimeca. Only emergency repressive measures and the continued importation
of Africans maintained Mexico's slave labour supply.65
H I S T O R I C A L A R C H A E O L O G Y OF T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

131

Nevertheless, African resistance in Mexico continued to mature in form and character. The struggle against slavery was being transferred into the battle to preserve the
collective identity of African peoples. By the early seventeenth century, according to
official colonial documents, at least one Black community, San Lorenzo de 10s Negros,
had acquired its right to existence by war and treaty.
The terms of the truce, as preserved in the archives, included eleven conditions
stipulated by Yanga upon which he and his people would cease their raiding. The
African demanded that all of his people who had fled before September of the past
year (1608) be freed and promised that those who had escaped slavery after that
date would be returned to their masters. He further stipulated that the palenque be
given the status of a free town and that it have its own cabildo and a justicia mayor
who was to be a Spanish layman. No other Spaniards were to live in the town,
although they could visit on market days. . . . In return Yanga promised that for a
fee the town would aid the viceroy in capturing fugitive slaves. The Negroes, he
said, would aid the crown in case of an external attack on Mexico.66
In the mountains near Mt. Orizaba, led by this man called Yanga, "reputedly a
Congolese chief from an African lungdom bordered by the Nyonga River,"67 the
"Yanguicos" had won the formal status as a free Black settlement. The mountains,
however, seemed to promise much more security to some Yanguicos and other cimarrones than the words and treaties of their Spanish oppressors. Throughout New Spain
palenques continued to multiply and, with a still undetermined frequency, to give
In a period
occasion for the establishment of officially recognized free cornmunitie~.~~
between 1630 and 1635, for example, an agreement was reached with cimarrones whose
redoubts had been established in the mountains of Totula, Palmilla, Tumbacarretas,
and Totolinga near Veracruz. The town of San Lorenzo Cerralvo became their free
settlement. In 1769, a similar history preceded the establishment of Nuestra Senora de
Guadalupe de 10s Morenos de Amapa, near the southern tip of the modern state of
V e r a c r ~ zWe
. ~ ~have learned of their existence through quite recent research into the
early colonial history of New Spain. In Colombia, their revolts are detailed in 1530,
1548, and again in the 1550s.~~
In 1552, Venezuela had its first major slave revolt. This
rebellion of slaves who had worked in the mines of Buria was defeated in 1555.
Nevertheless, by the beginning of the seventeenth century, independent Black communities with legal standing in the eyes of state agents had begun to appear.71
Palmares and Seventeenth-Century Marronage

In Brazil, which we have seen dominated the Portuguese slave trade, the maroon settlements (quilombos) that began in the sixteenth century would extend into the next.
Ernesto Ennes, a scholar who was far from being in sympathy with the f ~ g i t i v e s , ~ ~
nevertheless recorded in 1948 from his review of the documents in the Arquivo
Historic0 Colonial in Lisbon that he found "traces in every corner of Brazil" of
q~ilornbos.~~
Arthur Ramos, summarizing his own studies of Blacks in Brazil, declared:
132 R O O T S O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

From the beginnings of slavery, escapes were frequent. The escaped slaves, called
locally, quilombolas, often gathered together in organized groups, known in Brazil
as quilornbos. . . . From the beginning, the owners complained of the frequent
escapes of the slaves, demanding protection and security from the public authorities. Later the situation was met by the employment of the bush captain and by
notices in the press, publicizing the loss of the slaves and urging collective action
for their recapture.74
That the slaves had good reason to be concerned for their liberty, despite bland
suggestions from scholars like A. J. R. Russell-Wood that the only thing at issue was
their "adapting to a new diet, new environment, and new working condition^,"^^ is
suggested by Stuart Schwartz's consideration of the sugar industry in colonial Bahia:
Added to the rigors inherent in the system of sugar production and to occasional
acts of individual cruelty, slaves also suffered from a planned policy of punishment
and terror as a means of control. Plantation owners believed that only by severity
could work be accomplished and discipline maintained, especially when the ratio
in the fields was often forty slaves to one white sharecropper or overseer. This sort
of institutionalized brutality, when coupled with arduous labor, poor working
conditions, and simple cruelty, contributed to the motivations for escape.76
The work of Ramos, R. K. Kent, Irene Diggs, Donald Pierson, Edison Carneiro,
Schwartz, and Raymundo Nina Rodriques indicates that for Brazil as a whole, from
the sixteenth century into the late nineteenth century, slave resistance, rebellions, and
conspiracies were constants in that land.77In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, though, it was the maroon settlements that dominated the reaction to slavery.
In the Pernambuco region, the greatest settlement of all, the extraordinary state of
Palmares would endure from 1605 to 1695. Palmares was a plural, designating the
several settlements (palmars) that made up a community, which, though necessarily
agrarian, was even more preoccupied with its defense. Diggs gives us this description:
The site of the quilombo of 0 s Palmares was a mountainous region, steep and
precipitous-a natural defense of the inhabitants-but at the same time a virgin
land whose exuberance was considered the best in the state of Pernambuco. The
many fruit trees gave easy sustenance to those who knew where they were. Timberyielding trees served various industrial uses. Most important of all trees was the
palmera pindoba, the cocoanut palm, which . . . provided excellent food. . . and a
delicious drink.78
In 1645, Bartholomeus Lintz, acting as a scout for the expeditions that the Dutch were
to mount against Palmares, was the first hostile European to discover that the state
consisted of several settlements (two major palmers of 5,000 inhabitants, and several
small units totalling 6,000). By 1677, there were ten major palmars, one of which was
the capital (Macoco) where the "king" (Ganga-Zumba from the Zanda signifying
consensus ruler) resided, the whole state spanning over sixty leagues.79It was then
HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY O F THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

133

estimated that the population numbered between 15,000 and 20,000, a mixture of
Creoles and Africans largely drawn from the Angola-Congo regions. For almost a
century, neither the Portuguese nor the interloper Dutch, nor the Creole moradores
could destroy it, though they tried for more than seventy years. Even in the end,
"[bletween 1672-94," R. K. Kent tells us, "[ilt withstood on the average one Portuguese expedition every fifteen months."80There was, however, one important political
development during this period. In 1678, "[a]s he had done earlier, whenever a new
governor came to Pernambuco, Ganga-Zumba sued for peace." The treaty that was
eventually signed, Kent quotes Nina Rodriques, "gave a real importance to the Negro
State which now the Colony treated as one nation would another." The treaty, however, had little import for the moradores, who proceeded to claim and distribute
among themselves a substantial portion of the "Negro State."81Ganga-Zumba's authority was breached:
By 1679, a palmarista "captain named Zambi (whose uncle is Gana-Zona) was in
revolt (with) Ioao mulato, Canhonga, Gaspar (and) Amaro, having done the person of Ganga-Zumba to death." By March 1680, Zambi was being called upon to
surrender, without success. The war was on once more.82
Zambi (Zumbi), according to Ramos, "was already a well-known chief, whose deeds
amazed even the white ~oldiery?~He would apparently reign as king in New Palmares until its end almost two decades later. But in his accession to authority, it is
possible to recognize what Ramos and others have described as "the Bantu origins" of
palm are^.^^ The perception of authentic authority as identical with secured social
integrity was characteristically Central A f r i ~ a n . ~ ~
Palmares did fall, eventually, in 1694, the result of campaigns launched by successive Portuguese governors of Pernambuco (Joao da Cunha Sotto-Mayor, Marques de
Montebello, and Melo de Castro). The last expedition sent against it consisted of
nearly 3,000 men and was in the field for several months. The final siege was established on lo November 1693 and lasted until early February of the following year. The
total cost of the adventure was estimated by Melo de Castro at somewhere near
1,400,ooo cruzados.86
On the night of 5 February 1694, "Zumby," organizer of the defense of Palmares,
having discovered that his position on Barriga mountain had been nearly encircled,
sought a last desperate chance to escape. The result was described by Colonel Domingos Jorge Velho, the leader of the Portuguese forces:
During the second watch of that night, between the fifth and sixth of February,
suddenly and tumultuously [Zumby] with all his people and the equipment which
could follow him through that space, made an exit. The sentinels of that post did
not perceive them almost until the end. In the rear-guard Zumby himself was
leaving, and at that point he was shot twice. As it was dark, and all this was taking
place at the edge of the cliff, many-a matter of about two hundred-fell down the

134

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

cliff. As many others were killed. Of both sexes and all ages, five hundred and
nineteen were taken prisoner.87
In Pernambuco, again according to Governor Melo de Castro, "This happy victory
was regarded as no less important than the expulsion of the Dutch. It was, accordingly, celebrated by the whole population with displays of lights for six days and many
other demonstrations of joy, without any command being given to them." Keeping in
character, Ennes attributed this excitement to the "moral influence which it conferred
"Palmares:' Ramos reminds us, "was not, however, the only outon the a~thorities."~~
standing case. In 1650 the slaves in Rio de Janeiro organized a number of quilombos
which caused the police authorities of that region untold difficulties until suppressed
by Captain Manoel Jordao da S i l ~ a . " ~ ~
In this same century, the seventeenth century, the slaves of Jamaicajoined the tradition of those in Brazil and Mexico. Barbara Kopytoff has summarized the conditions:
During the era of slavery, communities of maroons, or escaped slaves, sprang up
throughout the New World. Wherever there were slave plantations, there was
resistance in the form of runaways and slave revolts; and wherever mountains,
swamps, or forests permitted the escaped slaves to gather, they formed communities. These ranged in size from Palmarres, in Brazil, with over ten thousand
people, to the handfulls of runaways who hid on the fringes of plantations in the
American South. While most. . . were destroyed. . . a few could not be reduced or
even ~ontained.~"
The mid-century exploded with revolts on that island in 1669,1672(twice), 1678,1682,
1685, and 1690. In Jamaica, marronage had begun during the period of Spanish
colonization (1509-1655).~~
And in the very last years of Spanish resistance (1655-60)
to British occupation of the island, at least three maroon camps played decisive roles
in supporting the guerrilla campaign led by Christobal de Yassi against the B r i t i ~ h . ~ ~
In the first month of 1660, however, the English made peace with one of the maroon
chiefs, Juan Lubolo (Juan de Bola), who promptly went to aid them in the destruction
of, first, the remaining major maroon camps, and, finally, Yassi's guerrillas. A little
more than three years later, Juan de Bola met his appropriate fate. What reads like an
official entry observed: "On the first day of November the outlying Negroes met with
Juan de Bola and cut him to pieces; else all things were quiet in the country."93Three
hundred years later, with an equal amount of sympathy David Buisseret and S. A. G.
Taylor unhesitantly estimated: "His death seems to us an act of justice . . . he was 'the
great traitor.' "94
During the next eighty years, two major maroon societies were formed in the highlands of Jamaica. One, the Windward Maroons, settling in the eastern mountains,
had as its nucleus the Spanish maroons and those who subsequently joined them
from the English plantations and towns. The other, the Leeward Maroons of the westcentral interior, came into being in 1673after the first of the slave rebellions during the

H I S T O R I C A L A R C H A E O L O G Y O F T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

135

English period.95 In 1690, another major rebellion, beginning on the Sutton estate,
added more than 200 refugees to the Leeward settlements complex. Such was the
primary fashion in which the settlements grew and maintained themselves:
The maroon societies were formed, and their numbers increased, largely by slave
rebellions and by individual and group escapes from the plantations. In addition,
slaves were captured by maroons during raids, and slave or free Negroes, sent to
fight the maroons, occasionally defected.
Rebellions furnished the largest numbers, as many as several hundred at a time,
but rebellions were only one of a number of occasions for escape. . . . There was a
steady trickle of runaways, and the trickle became a stream whenever English
punitive expeditions failed of their purpose.96
Apparently, too, because of the low ratio ofwomen to men, the maroon communities
were not yet self-reproducing.
Though Akan-speakers seemed to have been dominant among these Jamaican
maroons, the political structure of the Leeward Maroons closely followed that found
among the more central African palmaristas in Brazil. Cudjoe, who became a dominant Leeward maroon chieftain in the 173os, employed a paramilitary organization
that combined central authority with decentralized settlement. On the other hand,
Kopytoff notes, "by the 173os, the maroons in the east had coalesced into a kind of
cooperative federation in contrast."97 One clear distinction, though, between the
Jamaican and Brazilian Blacks was the presence of "obeah men and women, magical
practitioners" among the Windward and Leeward maroons.
To the masters Obeah was simply witchcraft, detested both for its secrecy and its
alleged skills in the poisoning of enemies. Even to blacks once assimilated, Obeah
assumed a sinister aura because of its association with the casting of spells to cause
harm as well as good. To the unassimilated, on the other hand, Obeah was both a
genuine religion and a potent source of medicine. Obeah (like the Haitian Voodoo,
or the Jamaican variant, Myalism, or Trinidadian Shango) sought ritualistic links
with the spirit world beyond the shadows and the sacred trees, providing a mystical
sense of continuity between the living, the dead, and those yet to be born.98
In Palmares, in keeping with the cosmologies of Congolese and Angolan societies,
magicians had been banned as inimical to the king's authority.99Among those peoples it was most often the case that legitimacy of authority and the very existence of
social order were concomitants to the eradication of sorcery and witchcraft.loOIn the
British West Indies, the elimination of obeah had become an official preocc~pation.'~~
And for good reason. Obeah men and women were frequently the source of ideology
for the slave rebellions:
[Olbeah functioned largely in the numerous rebellions of the slaves. This was
particularly the case with the obeah-men from the Gold Coast. . . . In the plotting
of these rebellions the obeah-man was essential in administering oaths of secrecy,
136 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

and, in cases, distributing fetishes which were supposed to immunize the insurgents from the arms of the whites.Io2
As it happened, obeah proved to be more resilient than its opponents. Indeed, it was
never extinguished. It continued its mutational adaptation and development in Jamaica (and elsewhere) over the centuries, successively manifesting itself in the societies of Myalism in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the Pocomania movement of the late nineteenth, and the Rastafarians of the present.Io3As we shall see, as it
was with obeah, it was also the case with marronage.
Returning to the seventeenth century, the palenques, mocambos, quilombos, and
maroon settlements that found sometimes tenuous, sometimes permanent existences
in Mexico, Brazil, and Jamaica were replicated throughout the Spanish territories and
the newer colonial possessions marking the expansions of British, French, and Dutch
merchant, agrarian, and bureaucratic interests. In Colombia, near the city of Cartagena, a palenque known as San Basilio was founded at the beginning of the century.
Earlier, in 1529 and 1550, revolts had occurred on the coast of this largely gold-, sugar-,
and cacao-producing colony. But as the extractive industries moved further into the
interior and Colombia's demand for labor had made it a major importer of Africans
(2oo,ooo), revolts and the establishment of refugee settlements became more frequent. Nevertheless, Aguiles Escalante tells us:
The most vigorous insurrectionist movement on the Caribbean coast of Colombia
occurred in Cartagena de Indias at the beginning of the seventeenth century during
the administration of Jeronimo de Sanzo Casarola. . . . The fiery and daring
Domingo Bioho was the first slave to revolt publicly. Claiming to have been king of
an African state, he plunged himself with thirty Negro men and women into the
forests and the marshy areas of Matuna (south of the town of Tolu). . . . Domingo,
now known as "King Benkos" . . . put an end to the period of colonial tranquility in
Cartagena, Tolu, Mompos, Tenerife, and so forth, by assaulting and robbing plantations, cattle ranches, cultivated farms . . . even canoes carrying fellow Negroes
who had been sent to fell large trees for lumber.104
Numerous expeditions against San Basilio failed and in 1612 and 1613, a treaty that
included amnesty was offered by the governor, Diego Fernandez de Valesco. Many of
the palenqueros accepted the terms, which included the abandonment of the settlement. But in 1619, when another major slave revolt occurred in Cartegena, Rout
maintains the occasion was seized by a subsequent governor to mete out what he took
to be a too-long deferred revenge on the ex-rebels.'05 Escalante, however, insists:
"Governor Garcia Giron . . . uncovered a new plot by Benkos and captured him, and
finally had him hanged."Io6 Still, descendants of the San Basilio palenque were to be
encountered in the hinterlands as late as 1790.'~~
Not until the very last years of the
seventeenth century (1696) did the last of the period's major slave rebellions in
Colombia take place.
In Venezuela, the settlement of Nirgua, which Baron de Humboldt apparently with
HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

137

some cynicism referred to as the "Republic of Zambos and Mulattoes:' was founded in
similar circumstances in 1601.1°8AS such, it was in a direct line of descent from the
rebellions that began in the colony in 1532 and again in 1555 with the establishment of
the Buria palenque associated with "King M i g ~ e l . ' Venezuela,
'~~~
whose economy was
a close replica of that of Colombia, would historically absorb a little more than half
the number of slaves (121,000). However, for almost 300 years, Venezuela's Spanish
settlements would have visited upon them the combined vengeance of Blacks, mulattos, Indians, and zambos. In its highlands and valleys, which became the sites for
rebellious cumbes, the social bases of liberation movements became increasingly
miscegenous after the seventeenth century. The same could be said of the towns that
developed in close approximation to its ports and inland markets. In the countryside,
the forming peasantry became anarchic. As far as is known, no vision of an African
state was ever associated with the flights or rebellions recorded in Venezuela. In the
towns, something more akin to class wars became the rule, pitting free Blacks, slaves,
poor whites, mulattos, zambos, and sometimes ladino Indians against the Spanish
ruling class. Perhaps another consequence of the deracination of Blacks and Indians
was that in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries Venezuela obtained a level of
violence in its rebellions and reactions that was barely matched elsewhere in the slave
societies.
Finally, in the British and French Guianas and Dutch Suriname, there occurred the
most extraordinary instances of marronage, the formation of what in the literature is
rightly referred to as the "Bush Negro tribes." These people-the Saramaka, Matawai,
Kwinti, and the Djuka, Aluku, and Paramaka-constitute the most enduring and
oldest examples of continuous marronage.l10They are a people who, in the instance
of Suriname, could be until quite recently in this century described as constituting "a
state within a state." Their history, too, begins in the seventeenth century, somewhere
near its second quarter. Richard Price, one of the best informed students of these
communities, has observed:
For some 300 years, the Guianas have been the classic setting for maroon communities. Though local maroons in French and British Guiana were wiped out by
the end of the eighteenth century, the maroons of Suriname, known as "Bush
Negroes," have long been the Hemisphere's largest maroon population. Except
perhaps for Haiti, these have been the most highly developed independent societies
and cultures in the history of Afro-America.ll1
Though the ancestries of these peoples are to be traced to the Windward, Gold, and
Slave Coasts and to LoangoIAngola, they fought and achieved a new identity: Bush
Negro. That past demands attention.
The conditions that produced the maroon communities and ultimately the genesis
of new peoples in the Guianas and Suriname were a product of a slave system in
extremis. Its most important characteristic was that for African labor Suriname
became the most lethal colony in the New World. As Price remarks: "The most
striking feature of Suriname's demographic history is the extraordinary cost of its
138

R O O T S O F BLACK R A D I C A L I S M

slave system in human lives." And R. D. Simons exclaimed: "[Wle have seen some
plantations swallow as many as four slave complements in a period of twenty-five
years."l12 The Dutch West Indies Companies and their successors were hard pressed to
supply and resupply the colony's need for fresh African workers. Suriname's laboring
population, then, was constantly being revitalized biologically and, as it turns out,
culturally. In a colony where the ratio of Blacks to whites became as high as 25:1 (in the
eighteenth century), and whose population maintained fewer than lo percent Creoles
for the first century, where labor was concentrated on large sugar, coffee, cacao, and
then cotton plantations, Price seems entirely justified in asserting that "inter-African
'syncretism' . . . was almost everywhere the central process."l13
We can assert with some confidence, then, that within the earliest decades of the
African presence in Suriname, the core of a new language and a new religion had
been developed; and the subsequent century of massive new importations from
Africa apparently had the effect merely of leading to secondary elaborations.l14
It was not long before the rain forests that boldly defined the limits of cultivable land
became the bounds for a resistance of an entirely different sort.
Marronage, of course, was a concomitant of slavery. Brutality was as much a raison
d'Ctre of the former as it was a condition of the latter. The English colonization of
Suriname was of short duration (1651-67), but even before the Dutch invasion of the
colony and the Treaty of Breda (1667),which formally ceded it to them, maroons had
appeared. l5
By the beginning of the eighteenth century, the maroon population was estimated
to have reached 5000 to 6000 . . . clearly an inflated figure, but indicative of the fear
in which the colonists held the rebels.l16
Extraordinary rewards were posted for the hunters of the liberationists, but even
more remarkable are the "rewards" that became customary for maroons. Price cites
an early (1718) contemporary report:

If a slave runs away into the forest in order to evade work for a few weeks, upon his
being captured his Achilles tendon is removed for the first offense, while for a
second offense, if he wishes to increase the punishment, his right leg is amputated
in order to stop him from running away; I myself was a witness to slaves being
punished thus.l17
Others were whipped to death with what was called the Spaanse bok (Spanish whip),
or quartered alive, burned alive, decapitated, impaled with a meathook, or broken on
scaffolds. Price argues that the multiplicity of travelers' accounts and local reports
attesting to the "unusual brutality" of the Suriname planters of both Dutch and
Portuguese Jewish origins fully substantiate that such practices were neither isolated
nor unofficial: "the colony's judiciary was often as brutal as the individual plante r ~ . " "The
~ report of the English mercenary, Captain J. G. Stedrnan, Narrative, of a
Five-Years' Expedition,Against the Revolted Negroes of Surinam, in Guiana, on the Wild
H I S T O R I C A L A R C H A E O L O G Y OF T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

139

Coast of South America; from the Year 1772, to 1777 (1796), is a classic and authentic
account of'a starkly brutal slave society. Price concludes:
All in all, the excesses of colonial Suriname-in terms of both the brutality and the
luxury amid which the planters lived-must be constantly kept in mind in building
toward some understanding of the slaves' response.l19
Thus were the beginnings of the Bush Negroes of that land, the oldest being the
Saramaka people. And at the end of the eighteenth century, after more than five
decades of intensive warfare, they achieved a formal peace.120 But perhaps the last
word should be from one of their own. In 1885, Johannes King recalled from the oral
traditions of his people:
The story of how our forefathers honored God and their early ancestors when they
came to receive the presents [presented by the government to the Bush Negroes as
confirmation of peace treaties] and then returned to their villages:
When they got back safely to their villages, they fired many salutes for the people
who had waited at home. These people came to the bank of the river singing, to
escort them to shore. They played drums, danced, blew African trumpets, and
sang, danced and celebrated the whole afternoon until nighttime and the whole
night until morning. . . . And they played drums so! When they were finished, they
would bring a bush drink that they made from sugar cane juice, and which is called
bush rum. They would pour a libation on the ground. That was in order to give
thanks to God and the ancestors. After that they would play for the obeahs and for
the other gods who had helped them fight.121
The struggle that had begun in the seventeenth century had met its fruition among
these African peoples far from the land of their a n ~ e s t 0 r s . l ~ ~
Black Resistance in North America

And so the litany of rebellions and marronage continued into the eighteenth century;
in the Guianas of Berbice, Essequibo, and Demerara in the 1730s and 1760s; in Jamaica
in the 1780s; in Cuba in the 1780s; in Venezuela in the 1730s and 1780s.'~~
AS the
capitalist strata of western Europe achieved political, social, and ideological maturity,
their jockeying for hegemony over the world system reduced African labor in its
homelands and in the New World peripheries to pawns of power.124State banditry, as
E. P. Thompson named it, became the modus operandi that weeded out the landed
nobilities and integrated their survivors with the rising bourgeoisies.125Intensive
exploitation of labor became the basis for purchasing new sortings of intra-European
d0minati0n.l~~
In the overseas territories, in the slave societies of Cuba, Brazil, North
America, Jamaica, and Haiti, restive colonial elites amassed wealth but envisioned
how much greater and diverse that wealth could become without the parasitism and
restraints of state and trade imposed by the dominant orders in the mother countries.
For these "ruling" elites, too, enslaved African labor, that is its super-exploitation,
I40

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

became the key to their 1iberati0n.l~~
All-whether landed nobility, landed colonists,
or the masters of long distance trade-believed the brutality of the slave system to be a
practical necessity. Maroon settlements like those of Jamaica, Cuba, and North America had to be destroyed, or failing that, quarantined. They could not be allowed to
contaminate a labor upon which so much depended. Frequently-too frequently for
the masters, however, it did not seem to matter.
Who, then, resisted slavery in the eighteenth century? The records concerning
armed revolt indicate that it was mainly the African-born, including male and
female, young and old, plantation slave and urban slave. This emphasis on the
African-born may have been for the simple reason that Africans outnumbered the
Creoles owing to the low birthrate on the plantations and the heavy importation of
Africans.12*
Wars of repression, then, still had to be undertaken, severe discipline maintained.
Even then, the masters' nightmares kept recurring and their hysterias periodically
assumed epidemic proportion^.'^^ As Christians, it might be added, they were possessed by a mythology of apocalypse too easily converted into frightening visions.130
At every opportunity, as Joshua Giddings's tale of Florida reminds us, the logic of
marronage was manifest.
The efforts of the Carolinians to enslave the Indians, brought with them the natural
and appropriate penalties. The Indians soon began to make their escape from
service to the Indian country. This example was soon followed by the African
slaves, who also fled to the Indian country, and, in order to secure themselves from
pursuit, continued their journey into Florida.
We are unable to fix the precise time when the persons thus exiled constituted a
separate community. Their numbers had become so great in 1736, that they were
formed into companies, and relied on by the Floridians as allies to aid in the
defense of that territory. They were also permitted to occupy lands upon the same
terms that were granted to the citizens of Spain; indeed, they in all respects became
free subjects of the Spanish crown.131
In North America, the maroon communities of the mid-century in Florida, Virginia,
and the Carolinas were anticipated by the slave revolt in New York City in 1712 and
In the final seventy years of the century,
that of Stono, South Carolina, in 1739.'~~
Gerald Mullin found in Virginia newspapers alone advertisements for nearly 1,500
fugitives from slavery.13"
Colonial North America was particularly vulnerable to slave liberation movements in those regions where Blacks made up a majority. At the century's beginning,
South Carolina and the eastern counties of Virginia were two such areas. And in the
early eighteenth century when South Carolina's African population was being hastily
enlarged-at a rate in the 1730s of more than 1,000 per year, according to Peter
W ~ o d ' ~ ~ - aa concomitant
s
to the colony's growing domination by rice production,
Harvey Wish writes that "the plantation-system had yielded bumper crops of slave
H I S T O R I C A L A R C H A E O L O G Y O F THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

141

uprisings and revolts."135In 1713, 1720, the 173os, and the I ~ ~ Oconspiracies
S,
and
actual rebellions were routinely reported to London. From the early 1780s the Black
liberationists were further encouraged by the action of the Spanish king, Philip V,
who authorized granting them liberty once they reached F10rida.l~~
In 1738, when
sixty-nine slaves escaped to St. Augustine, they were settled at Pueblo de Gracia Real
de Santa Terese de Mose, or "Moose," two and one-half miles north of the city.13' Ten
months later,
In September 1739 South Carolina was shaken by an incident which became known
as the Stono Uprising. A group of slaves struck a violent but abortive blow for
liberation which resulted in the deaths of more than sixty people. Fewer than
twenty-five white lives were taken, and property damage was localized, but the
episode represented a new dimension in overt resistance. Free colonists, whose
anxieties about controlling slaves had been growing for some time, saw their fears
of open violence realized, and this in turn generated new fears.138
It was several months before the officials of the colony were satisfied that the Stono
rebellion was over. By then, however, a second conspiracy, in June 1740, demanded
their attention.139Reports of and official reactions to maroons continued into the
1740s but with the formation of Georgia as a colony free of Black slavery (until 1750),
the southern route to liberty became more hazardous (both for the slaves and the
Georgian colonists who sought to impede them). Still, Henry Laurens, "distinguished
"a most horrid insurrecnative," had cause to note in a letter dated 21 March 1748,'~~
tion" in the colony.
In colonial Virginia, trials of "Negro rebels" began to dot the counties' records as
early as the late seventeenth century.141 Seldom very expansive, the records of the
period most often reflected official fastidiousness. In James City county on 30 May
1688, for example, the disposition of a case remanded from Westmoreland County
earlier (26 April) was concluded by the General Court: "It apeard that Sam a Negro
Servt to Richard Metcalfe hath several times endeavoured to promote a Negro Insurreccon in this Colony." We shall never know what this man said to his accusers, his
reasons or his achievements. We do know that Sam was ordered to be whipped
around the town and fitted with an iron collar with four spriggs that he was to wear
until his death. It was hoped that this would "deter him & others from the like evil
practice for time to come."142Just how effective the General Court's punishment was
can perhaps be judged by the fact that in the counties of Surrey, Isle of Wight, James
City, Middlesex, and Gloucester, several plots involving first Indian and Blacks, and
then Blacks separately were reported discovered in 1709,1722, and 1723.l~~
And in 1727,
a maroon community of Indians and Blacks, which its inhabitants called des Natanapalle, was betrayed by a former resident.'44Further marronage in Virginia and neighboring Maryland has been reported by Allan KulikoE
A few Africans formed communities in the wilderness in the ipos, when Black
immigration was high and the frontier close to tidewater. . . .
142 ROOTS OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

At least two outlying runaway communities were established during the 1720s.
Fifteen slaves began a settlement in 1729 on the frontier near present-day Lexington, Virginia. They ran from "a new Plantation on the head of the James River,"
taking tools, arms, clothing, and food with them. When captured, "they had already begun to clear the ground." Another small community evidently developed
on the Maryland frontier in 1728 and 1729. Harry, one of the runaways, returned to
southern Prince George's County to report on the place to his former shipmates.
He told them that "there were many Negroes among the Indians at Monocosy" and
tried to entice them to join the group by claiming that Indians were soon going to
attack the
But the history of marronage in colonial Virginia is still far from complete. In a
period (1718-69) during which Philip Curtin calculates the proportion of Africans
brought directly to the colony increased, the absence of the mention of marronage in
the 1750-80 years seems odd.'46 This is particularly the case when Gerald Mullin
informs us advertised "runaways" were prominent, 12 percent of them being described as African-born or "outlandish," and a third of the fugitives were thought by
their masters to be headed for inland North Car01ina.I~~
Nevertheless there is evidence of such communities in the late eighteenth century (1781) in what was by then a
commonwealth, as well as references to maroon communities having been established in areas of South Carolina (1765) and Georgia (1771,1772,1780s)in the colonial
and post-colonial periods.148Again, it was precisely in those places where Blacks
constituted a substantial proportion of the population-North Carolina, where the
1790 census149put the slave population at 26.8 percent; Maryland, 34.7 percent; Georgia, 35.9 percent; Virginia, 40.9 percent; South Carolina, 43.7 percent-that the available records indicate rebellions and maroon activity was most likely to occur.
Moreover, it was precisely these Black populations that demonstrated, in the century's eighth decade, the capacity to respond to British overtures during the American
rebellion and to the presence of British troops and propaganda. Jack Foner writes:
At the very time that the American Army ended the practice of recruiting blacks,
the British adopted it, hoping in this way to overcome their acute manpower
shortage, to cripple the rebellious colonies economically by inducing slaves to
desert their rebel masters and seek refuge within the British lines, and to convince
the blacks, by offering them liberty in exchange for military service, that their
freedom depended on the success of British arms.150
Nonetheless, as Jeffrey Crow cautions, the slaves' response to the machinations of the
British General Thomas Gage, and Lord Dunmore, governor of colonial Virginia, had
its independent context:
But the slave unrest that accompanied the opening stages of the war was too
widespread to have been the work of a single British conspiracy, though royal
governors and military observers had often commented on the potential for a
massive slave insurrection in the southern colonies. From the Chesapeake to the
H I S T O R I C A L A R C H A E O L O G Y O F T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

143

Georgia coast, black insurgents sprang into action even before the British tendered
their help.15'
Rebellious slaves had always been attentive to the crises among their exploiters, and
any momentary advantage, whether it be a master's absence for a few days, the
French-Indian War, or a nationalist rebellion, was likely to be seized.152And on those
rare occasions when the slaves perceived the appearance of a powerful ally, as with the
British during the 1770s,'~~
the consequences could be dramatic: "Contemporaries
estimated that the South lost as many as 55,000 bondsmen," Crow suggests. Many
evacuated with the British or were emancipated. Others simply attempted to pass as
free B 1 a ~ k s . IBy
~ ~1775, the leaders of the Continental Army had been compelled to
compete with the British authorities for Blacks both for their efforts on land and
sea.'55And though some fractions of the ruling class continued to resist the enlargement of the slave soldiery-notably the state legislatures of Georgia and South Carolina-in the end more Blacks were enlisted as combatants by the nationalists than by
their British opponents.156After the war, however, the British military proved to be
the more faithful ally of the slave soldiers.'57Not surprisingly, then, in the Carolinas,
Georgia, and Virginia, the 1780s and the 1790s were times of rebellion in the young
"republic."
Black assertiveness in postwar North Carolina revealed a greater collective consciousness among slaves and an increasing willingness to use violence to liberate
not only individuals but groups of slaves. In 1783 the Chowan County court tried
the slave Grainge for the "atrocious Crime of endeavouring to Stir up Slaves for the
Diabolical purpose of Murdering their Masters and Mistresses." . . .
In the summer of 1795 Wilmington suffered sporadic attacks by a "number
of runaway Negroes, who in the daytime secrete themselves in the swamps and
woods" and at night commit "various depredations on the neighbouring plantations." . . In Bertie County in 1798 three black men were accused of heading a
conspiracy of 150 slaves, armed with "Guns, clubs, Swords, and K n i ~ e s . " ' ~ ~
And it was not only the slaves who were dissatisfied with the political issue of the
Rebellion. During the waning months of the war, whites joined them in attacks on
plantations in Virginia's Goochland and City (formerly King George) counties.'59

The Haitian Revolution

The eighteenth century ended with a movement of slaves to match the drama of
Brazil's Palmares and the significance of the maroon settlements in Jamaica and Suriname during the preceding century. In Haiti, between 1791 and 1804, slave armies
managed to defeat the French, Spanish, and English militaries-the most sophisticated armies of the day. Haiti thus became the second New World colony to achieve
political independence from its European master and the first slave society to achieve
the permanent destruction of a slave system. Modern Haiti constituted the western
144

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

third ofthe island that sixteenth-century Spaniards had known as Hispaniola. Its early
history during this Spanish occupation has already been rehearsed here. Having
largely eliminated its native inhabitants and leached its sources of precious metals, the
conquistadors quickly moved on. With the depopulation of Hispaniola and the complete domination of Spain's New World economy by the mines and plantations of
Nueva Espana and Colombia after the mid-sixteenth century, the island retreated to
the more remote pages of history. Only the eastern regions retained any substantial
remnant of its colonial population while, as T. 0 . Ott, in slight imitation of the poetic
form lilts, "the only inhabitants on the western part of the island were the roving herds
of cattle and swine, which had escaped the Spanish."160 In the seventeenth century, the
western regions ofwhat the French called Saint-Domingue acquired some settlements
based on the activities of renegade seamen and pirates from Tortue (Tortuga). Attracted initially by the supply of meat in that region, and then subsequently encouraged by French colonial authorities (one of which, Bertrand d'ogeron, imported
women from Paris in the 1660s),the boucanien (named for their diet of almost-burnt
meat) gradually transformed into planters. Just as gradually, their French settlements
in western Hispaniola reintroduced a slave system.16' The census of 1681 recorded a
slave population of 2,000 and that of 1687, one of 3,400. But after the Treaty of Ryswick
(1697) in which Spain officially recognized French Saint-Domingue, and Louis XIV
restricted the boucaniers plunder to slaves, the Black population increased rather
rapidly. By 1701, an official memoir destined for the Ministers of Marine estimated the
slave population at 20,000, and in 1754 a similar document put the figure then at
2 3 0 , o o o . ~On
~ ~the eve of the Revolution, the slave population was estimated to be
between 450,000 and 5og,ooo, the white population, 30,000 and the mulatto population ("French colonies being what they are,"163as Norman Stone has observed)
roughly equalling the whites. It was all quite understandable.
By 1790, Haiti was perhaps the most productive colony the modern world had
known. Its sugar, coffee, indigo, and tobacco production was said to be greater than
the total for British North America. And what the British West Indies had done for
the economies of Bristol, Manchester, and the like, Saint-Domingue did for Nantes,
Bordeaux, Marseilles, Orleans, Dieppe, Bercy-Paris, and another "dozen great towns."
C. L. R. James commented:
It received in its ports 1,587 ships, a greater number than Marseilles, and France
used for the San Domingo trade alone 750 great vessels employing 24,000 sailors. In
1789 Britain's export trade would be 27 million pounds, that of France 17 million
pounds, of which the trade of San Domingo would account for nearly 11 million
pounds. The whole of Britain's colonial trade in that year amounted to only five
million pounds. 164
And all of it rested on slavery. "Negroes, and food for the negroes; that is the one rule
for the Colonies," a French economist of the late eighteenth century de~1ared.l~~
Haiti's slave population, however, was not self-reproducing. And even so severe a
"Negrophobe" as Lothrop Stoddard had to admit to the reason why. Sandwiched
HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY O F THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

145

between his evocation of the official rationalizations for the persistent destruction of
the Black population-explanations that ranged from the truths of improper food,
the exploitation of pregnant women, high infant morality, and venereal disease, to the
absurdities of proposing the "nervous strain" on savages suddenly introduced to
continuous labor, and the supposition of an analogy to the impact of captivity on the
reproductive capacities of wild animals-Stoddard was compelled to acknowledge:
"The general opinion seems to have been that the negroes were worked too hard,
and. . . that this was often deliberately done, as many masters considered it cheaper to
buy slaves than to breed them."'66 As a consequence, the colony was forced to import
Africans at a rate, which, by the time of the revolution, had grown to at least 40,000
each year. In turn, Stoddard recognized, "One of the most important considerations
for the history of the Revolution in San Domingo is the fact that a majority of the
negro population was African-born."167
In its second slave era, then, Haiti had ultimately recapitulated some of the phenomenology of its first. Its slave system was cruel and genocidal; its master class made
up of destitute aristocrats and others just as desperate to achieve the wealth and titles
of noble status; its laboring class increasingly African; and its whites differentiated
between the few who succeeded and then absented themselves and the many whose
only achievement was as minor functionaries. One other such reoccurrence was
marronage. Stoddard in typical fashion commented:
there was always a minority of untamable spirits who burst their bonds and sought
an outlaw's freedom. In a mountainous country like San Domingo this was easy,
and soon every tract of forest and jungle came to have its wild denizens.
. . . [A]s time went on, the numbers of the maroons steadily increased. During
the year 1720 alone, over one thousand negroes took to the woods, while in 1751 a
high official estimated the refugees in the mountains of the Spanish border at over
three thousand.168
"Wild" outlawry was the most respect that scholars in the tradition joined by Stoddard could accord to the maroons. Despite repeated efforts to destroy the communities, they persisted, however, "devastating the countryside and inspiring fear in the
Saint-Domingue settlers at the end of the eighteenth century."169Others, like the
famed Le Maniel, made their peace with the colonial authorities only on the very eve
of the revolution that would eventually make them redundant. Yet their importance,
the significance they bore for the ideologists of the colonial regime, went far beyond
their objective achievement. Like the revolution their existence foretold, they were
demeaned and devalued by those who saw in them a contradiction to the myths of
European superiority.
The precise, that is historical, relationship of the maroons to the Haitian revolution
is still a matter of debate-particularly so among Haitian historians.170Some traditions hold that the maroons played no role in the revolution at all. Others declare that
the maroons were "the principal origin of the rising of 1791."171 If it were not Haiti

146 ROOTS O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

about which the controversy revolved, the debate might have very well been settled by
the available evidence. After all, voodoo, which James termed "the medium of the
conspiracy" (of 1791), had also inspired earlier maroon revolts, the most important of
which had occurred barely thirty years before under the guide of Mackandel; two of
the Revolution's first leaders were maroons: Boukman "a fugitive slave from Jamaica,"
and Jean Fran~ois"who had spent the last few years prior to 1791as a maroon"; and, as
well, when in late August, mulattos of the Western Province too rose up against the
French, we know that they enlisted maroons whom they termed "the Swiss," (and
The maroons, it would seem, were an integral
whom they would e~entuallybetray).'~~
part of the disparate elements that crystallized into the Haitian Revolution. But they
had been party to the genesis of a pariah nation, a Black republic that, in the first years
of the nineteenth century, threatened the slave societies that were its neighbors and
confounded the heirs to the more recent racial ideology. Haiti's maroons were part
of an unacceptable entity. Their history and their historical character had become
pawns; objects of contest between Haitian ideologues representing what David Nich011s calls "the black and mulatto legends of the past"; and related to the diminution of
the revolution itself by European and American historians and scholars:173
Divisions among the whites, the population structure, the international situation:
these are all factors which must be taken in account when attempting to explain the
course of events leading up to Haitian independence. To conclude from this that
the black slave population played a merely passive role in the revolution would be
seriously to misperceive the situation. Perhaps we may excuse the anthropologist
Leyburn for a somewhat naive approach to the past, when he suggests that "it was
not the resentment of slaves against their masters which caused the final explosion;
the slaves were tinder used by others to keep the conflagration burning." Less
innocent, however, is T. 0.Ott in his explicitly historical work, The Haitian Revolution. The author clearly sees that "there was no monolithic cause of the slave
rebellion," yet he commits himself to the extraordinary view that the whites and
mulattos "handed them [the slaves] the colony by default:' and "forced them into a
course of action which they would not otherwise have adopted."174
Less comfortable with the dialectic that James employed so effectively in his study
of the revolution (and which we will explore in Part 111), Nicholls concluded: "the
movement succeeded because of its structural relationship to the global situation. But
this is not to say that the slaves were merely passive."175We should know, though, that
Nicholls's tempered criticisms are of the milder and more recent expressions of an
academic tradition some of whose elements appeared as early as October 1791.'~~
And
among its contributors were those ofwhom James declared in 1938 constituted a venal
race of scholars, profiteering panders to national vanity, [who] have conspired to
obscure the
The truth of the Haitian Revolution, however, was not long in doubt in the slave
societies of the other West Indies and the Americas of the late eighteenth and early

HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

147

nineteenth centuries. For 13 years they were all-the masters fearfully, the slaves
expectantly-witnesses to the struggles between slave armies and the forces of France,
Britain, Spain, and then France again. They heard some version of the gigantic
Boukman, the Papaloi, whose plan for a massive revolt had been constructed in the
early months of 1791 and revealed to the authorities by the abortive uprising of the
slaves in Limbe in early August. They understood how the racial arrogance of the
colonials had deceived them into delay, deflecting their attention to the petite blancs
rabble of Le Cap Franqois whose greed masked as revolutionary ideals had to be
behind any slave insurrection with this reported scale. They were fascinated by the
details of the night of lightning, wind, and rain, 22 August, when Boukman called
together the slaves of the Turpin, Flaville, Clement, Tremes, and Noe plantations of
the northern plain and they began the mass destruction of the objects of their
oppression. They heard how quickly the rebellion had spread. Suddenly, it seemed,
loo,ooo angry Blacks in the North Province alone had swept the plain clean of its
century-old vestiges of slavery. In the Western Province, mulatto forces had joined the
revolution and when it was propitious for them, betrayed it. Their treason to the
insurgents was short-lived and their promised reward not forthcoming. They would
rejoin the revolution-and betray it again. By late September, Boukman was dead and
so were his comrades Gilles and John Baptiste. But the slaves were now transformed
into Black armies, marching into battle "to African martial music and with unfurled
banners inscribed with 'death to all whites.'
From that moment on, the grand
historical parade of the Haitian Revolution proceeded. The witnesses learned the
names of Toussaint L'Ouverture, the ex-slave who had acquired slaves of his own
before joining and then becoming the first overall commander of the Black revolution; Dessalines, the slave whose military genius and hatred of the whites would
knit the movement back together again when it was wounded by Napoleon's treacherous betrayal of Toussaint, and propel it toward new revolutionary heights; Henri
Christophe, the slave whose old intimacy with Cap Fran~oissociety would seduce
him into becoming Emperor of Haiti, matching his station with the much grander
presences of Napoleon. And perhaps if they were very attentive, they came to know
other leaders like Moise, Jeannot, Jean Franqois, and the French Republic's Sonthonax, and heard, no doubt with due anonymity, of the mysterious achievements of
men like H y a ~ i n t h . ' ~ ~
The slaves of Haiti were in no way passive recipients. Haiti burned the ears of the
slave owners in the New World at the beginning of the nineteenth century. They
whispered its name, futilely conspiring to deny its legend and its very existence to
their properties. But it was their ideologues, their intellectuals, their academies that
succeeded in the larger suppression of the fact. Their weaponry was ridicule while
those of their bourgeois masters were economic and diplomatic strangulation. And in
this century, in due course, when the memory of the revolt had faded among most of
the descendants of the master and slave classes of the Old and New Worlds, the still
classic and unsurpassed study of the revolution by James appeared. Thus, for the

148 ROOTS OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

moment, it is appropriate that he should have the last word. Of that revolution of
slaves, James summed up his reconstruction of what had happened in Haiti:
No one could have guessed the power that was born in them when Boukman gave
the signal for revolt on that stormy August night in 1791. Rebellion, war, peace,
economic organization, international diplomacy, administration, they had shown
their capacity. . . . The national struggle against Bonaparte in Spain, the burning of
Moscow by the Russians that fills the histories of the period, were anticipated and
excelled by the blacks and Mulattoes of the island of San Domingo. The records are
there. For self-sacrifice and heroism, the men, women and children who drove out
the French stand second to no fighters for independence in any place or time. And
the reason was simple. They had seen at last that without independence they could
not maintain their liberty.180
But even before this Black rebellion was resolved, its impact was being felt elsewhere. From Haiti, the revolution extended to Louisiana in 1795, Virginia in 1800, and
Louisiana again in 1811.'81Quite recently, Eugene Genovese has remarked:
Gabriel Prosser in 1800 and Denmark Vesey in 1822 consciously looked to Haiti for
inspiration and support, and as late as 1840 slaves in South Carolina were interpreting news from Haiti as a harbinger of their own liberation. . . . The slaveholders . . .
understood the potential of what they saw. References to the example and inspiration of Haiti reverberated across black America. The impact on David Walker may
be readily see from his great Appeal. . . . And the slaveholders were not amused by
celebrations of Haitian independence such as that staged in 1859 by free Negro
masons in St. Louis, Missouri-a slave state. . . . The revolution in Saint-Domingue
propelled a revolution in black consciousness throughout the New W0r1d.l~~
From Haiti and the "one great militia:' which Du Boisls%nd Genovese claim the
white South constituted, the revolutionary tradition lit up the horizon of Brazil's
Bahia region. From 1807 to 1835, the chroniclers of Bahia recorded revolt after revolt:
1807,1809,1813,1816,1826,1827,1830,and the great "Hausa Revolt" in 1835. Again, it is
the works of Nina Rodrigues, Artur Ramos, and more recently R. K. Kent and Stuart
Schwartz-not always in agreement-that form the integument for both the recovery
and the reconstruction of these events.
Black Brazil and Resistance

Brazil, by the second decade of the nineteenth century, had amassed a population,
half free, half slave, of more or less 3,817,000.~~~
It was then in the midst of the process
of importing the almost two million Africans whose arrivals its records give evidence
~ ~a~way all this activity with respect to the
for between the years 1800 and 1 8 5 0 . In
slave trade was quite in character for a society whose economy, social structure, and
mores had become dominated by African labor. Brazil had become a slave society that

HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

149

obtained a scale of dependence unmatched by any other. Indeed, slave labor was so
omnipresent in Brazil by these years that its uses far exceeded the elementary functions of material production. The presence of slaves had begun to invade the more
subtle regions of "vanity" and "vice," providing to the master class "a certain pleasure
of command and authority" as one mid-nineteenth-century Brazilian observer, Luiz
Lacerda, put it.lR6Robert Conrad has made the same point more graphically:
A Bahian, writing in 1887, revealed that before 1850 wagons or carts were almost
never used in his city to carry loads. Weights were carried on the heads of slaves or
"by means of the most barbaric and antieconomic instrument imaginable-the
pole and line," with which eight or even twelve men were sometimes employed in
carrying a single burden. Wealthy persons were transported about Brazilian cities
or even through the countryside in sedan chairs, palanquins, or hammocks with a
similar lavish use of personnel.lR7
Now the slave was more than an object of luxury, as Lacerda had believed. The slave in
nineteenth-century Brazil had become a costume, an item of social dress and selfpresentation as well as the source of the energy that produced the real wealth of the
economy.
With respect to that economy, Leslie Bethel1 has reconstructed its character:
[Slugar remained the colony's major cash crop and large concentrations of slaves
were still to be found on the sugar plantations of the Reconcavo (the fertile coastal
area of Bahia), in Pernambuco, in the baixadafluminense (the coastal strip ofwhat is
now the state ofRio de Janeiro) and, a more recent development, in Sao Paulo. Slaves
also worked both the cotton plantations of Pernambuco and southwest Maranhao
(cotton represented 20 percent ofthe value of Brazil's exports at the beginning ofthe
nineteenth century) and the tobacco and cacao plantations of Bahia and Alaboas. In
the far south-Rio Grande de Sao Pedro. . . and Santa Catarina-negro slaves were
employed in stockraising . . . in cereal production and in subsistence agriculture.
There were also large numbers of slaves engaged in subsistence agriculture in Minas
Gerais where the gold and diamond mines, which had flourished during the first
half of the eighteenth century but which were now in decline, had served to attract
slave labour to the area. In Rio de Janeiro, the viceregal capital since 1763, in Bahia,
the former capital, and, indeed, in every other major town, slaves were widely
employed as domestic servants, and negros de ganho-individual slaves who were
hired out by their masters and paid wages-were to be found working as stevedores
and porters in the docks, water and refuse carriers, and even as masons and
carpenters. The Church-monasteries, convents and hospitals-owned slaves. The
State owned and hired slaves for the building and maintenance of public works.la8
Slavery, it appears, occupied most Brazilians and preoccupied all. And, finally, to the
consternation of few Brazilians it seems, the etiquette of domination was extended far
beyond the boundaries of race and color:

IS0

ROOTS OF BLACK RADICALISM

[TIhe existence of white slaves in Brazil [w]as attested to in 1827by a member of the
national Chamber of Deputies. "It is a taint in the blood," as [Robert] Walsh put it
with Anglo-Saxon incredulity, "which no length of time, no change in relationship,
no alteration of colour can obliterate."ls9
Conrad, himself, observes: "If whites or near whites were sometimes kept in a state of
slavery, mulattoes or blacks (sometimes slaves themselves) also owned slaves."190
Typically of the Caribbean and South America, however, the Africans of Brazil were
what Philip Curtin unfortunately described as "a naturally decreasing slave population."191 "Natural" in such instances may be the historical demographers way of
indicating the unfavorable ratio of births to deaths in a population, but its use here is
both unfortunate and unacceptable for two reasons: first, because it appears to draw
our attention too narrowly to the slave as a biological organism presuming a normal
environment; and second because such a phrase as "naturally decreasing" diminishes
the painful reality and the tragic experience of Brazil's slave population. Bethell, on
the other hand, puts this decrease in its historical context:
The slave population of Brazil required regular replenishment through the transatlantic slave trade. One reason for this was the very high slave mortality rate. Many
slaves never survived their initial acclimatization and training; others died as a result
of poor diet, insanitary living conditions and disease. . . . More important, since it
was considered most economic to "work out" slaves . . . and then to replace them
with others, a great many Africans died from ill-treatment and sheer exhaustion. At
the same time, the rate of natural reproduction amongst slaves was extremely
In addition, he remarks, "there were, on the average, eight men to every two female
slaves," and infant mortality was high. The end result, as Bethel1 has already been seen
to conclude: "The slave population of Brazil required regular replenishment."
A second cause for the increase of slaves in early nineteenth-century Brazil was the
rapid growth of the region's economy during this period. In this respect, Brazil was
responding to political, economic, and financial forces in the world market. At its
base, the spurt in the Brazilian economy was a consequence of the market demand for
sugar and cotton: "[Tlhe American Revolutionary Wars, the French Revolutionary
Wars, the Napoleonic Wars and, not least, the bloody uprising in the Caribbean sugar
island of St. Domingue had crippled many of Brazil's economic rivals and raised
world prices for tropical produce."193Parallel interests in the early part of the century
also encouraged the extension of coffee cultivation in Brazil: "Planted in Maranhao in
the Brazilian north during the first half of the eighteenth century, coffee was brought
to Rio de Janeiro in the i77os, and in the years immediately following the establishment of the Portuguese royal government in Rio (1808), coffee became the most
important crop of the nearby mountainous hinterland."194Brazil was now this hemisphere's single most important site for slave production outside North America. The
world economy was settling once again.

HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

I51

Of course, it was new sources of capital invested directly and indirectly in Brazil's
trade and production that lay behind the massive slave imports of the period. And it
was primarily an English merchant class (with support from Portuguese trade, American shipping, and other interests),Iy5anxious to dominate or monopolize a world
market whose tropical commodities had been expropriated from their French competitors by the Haitian Revolution, which subsidized both the effort at political
independence for Brazil from Portugal and the accelerating Africanization of Brazil's
economy.lY6
Eric Williams reported: "It was said that seven-tenths of the goods used by
Brazil for slave purchases were British manufactures, and it was whispered that
the British were reluctant to destroy the barracoons on the coast because they would
thereby destroy British Calicoes. In 1845, Peel refused to deny the fact that British
subjects were engaged in the slave trade."IY7Notwithstanding the British government's
persistent and public opposition to slavery and its efforts to compel Brazil to abolish
the trade-to all of which historians have paid great attention-Williams observed:
The British capitalists, however, remained unimpressed. In 1857 [30 January] an
editorial in the London Times declared: "We know that for all mercantile purposes
England is one of the States, and that, in effect, we are partners with the Southern
planter; we hold a bill of sale over his goods and chattels, his live and dead stock,
and take a lion's share in the profits of slavery; . . . we are clothing not only
ourselves, but all the world besides, with the very cotton picked and cleaned by
'Uncle Tom' and his fellow-sufferers. It is our trade. . . 1' British capitalism had
destroyed West Indian slavery, but it continued to thrive on Brazilian, Cuban and
American slavery.lY8
It was for this reason, Alan Manchester reports, the suppression of the Brazilian trade
was unpopular in northern England, and that John Bright called attention to the four
or five millions of capital and three millions of export to Brazil and demonstrated the
damage done to British interests by the slave trade controversy."19yAnd it was this
relationship that was the basis of the charge of hypocrisy leveled at Britain by certain
"Yankee" and Brazilian critics.200
Such, then, were the grounds for the scale of African importation into Brazil that
occurred in the first half of the nineteenth century. In social terms, it meant, if we
follow Ramos's calculations, two-thirds (2,414,000) of the Brazilian population would
become Black (preto) or mulatto (pardo), and i,g3o,ooo of them slaves.201
Inevitably, in response to this vastly augmented slave population, by the early
nineteenth century Brazilian planters and settlers had achieved an appropriate "sociology" of slave control. And though it appeared to develop in an almost total
ignorance of the country's maroon history of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and of the political exigencies that molded the particularities of the slave trade
to the world economy (that is, the varying accesses to reservoirs of African labor), at
some level we must presume it took them into account if only in a mystified fashion.
Kent, describing this new and presumably comforting mythology of slave control,
reconstructed it as succinctly as is possible:
162 R O O T S O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

For a long time the Portuguese morador or "settler" in Brazil had himself assumed
that all slaves from Africa were "Angolas" or "Bantus" and since Brazilian agriculture was developed by the "Bantu" farmer his reputation continued to hold even
long after it became apparent that "all Africans" were not "alike." For the "Angolas,"
sought at the engenhos (sugar mill and plantation complexes in the immediate
hinterland of Bahia called Reconcavo), a composite belief in their "docility" and
willingness to assimilate and in their greater "mechanical inclination" was grafted
onto the earlier reputation of agricultural excellence. The "Minas" on the other
hand encountered an entirely different demand: regarded as more enterprising and
intelligent than "Angolas" and as poor plantation hands at the same time, they were
valued as household slaves and in the trades and skills.202
In other words, those peoples who had in the most early era of the colony's development as a plantation and mining economy served as the source of labor were seen as
pliable and naturally agrarian; those whose recruitment coincided with the region's
beginning of urbanization and secondary manufacturing were also naturally inclined
to those niches to which they were disposed. And, as we have already suggested, the
collective myth denied the possibility of African resistance to slavery through its
reliance on manageable characteristics: "docility" and "enterprising." This was made
possible, perhaps, by the fact that "the basic form of slave resistancen203up to this
moment had been quilombos, a habit that physically removed recalcitrant Africans
from the society ofwhites. But though the legend is still maintained in some circles of
Brazilian i n t e l l i g e n t ~ i ain
, ~the
~ ~ first third of the nineteenth century it was shattered.
By the mid-nineteenth century, Joao Pandia Calogeras comments, "The Negroes
came to be regarded as a dangerous element in the population, a menace to the lives
and safety of their masters."205Rollie Poppino concurs, noting: "[Tlhe sharp rise in
the number of slaves raised the specter of Negro rebellions," and moreover, "the
steady increase in the Negro sector of the population was [seen to be] undermining
the basically European culture of Brazil."206Though the details of the historical events
that account for this change of attitude are still not entirely agreed upon or mastered,
the broader character of those events is known. They were, as suggested, the rebellions of the 1808-35 period.
By the 1820s, Bahian and other Brazilian factors had become the dominant agents
in the newly independent nation's slave trade. Now, with direct control of the slave
market in the hands of collaborators close to the planters, it would be expected that
the disposition of Africans would more faithfully adhere to the rules implied by the
society's code of slave control: "Minas" to the urban areas, "Angolas" to the mills and
their associated plantations. For the most part and for some time that is how it went.
Inevitably, however, new exigencies compelled adaptation. This break, one historian
surmises, was important both to the construction of the slave rebellions that followed
as well as to their subsequent reconstruction.
Kent argues that in West Africa, the breakdown of the Old Oyo Empire of the
Yorubas and the long succession of Yoruba Wars that followed in the early nineteenth
HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

153

century gave Bahia ready access to Yoruba craftsmen, and Kent reasons that this may
have also been the cause for "a greater number of Hausa slaves [going] to the engenhos in the R e c o n c a ~ o . Two
"~~~
consequences, Kent believes, of the more complex slave
demography that resulted were that first, contemporary local authorities and subsequently such scholars as Nina Rodrigues and Ramos had difficulty reconstructing the
character that could be ascribed to the particular slave movements that emerged
during the period.
The "Hausa revolts" between 1808 and 1835, Kent maintains, were a construct of
part fact, part attempted manipulation by local planters and merchants of state authorities, and part prejudicial renderings of evidence of Muslim involvement. Hausa
slaves were, no doubt, quite active as insurrectionists. Jose Rodrigues has written
quite recently: "The least submissive Negroes in Brazil were the Hausas; they headed
all uprisings in Bahia and in Brazil, being especially prominent in those of 1720,1806,
1809,1813,1814,1822,1826,1835, and 1838."208In Reconcavo, for instance, where Hausa
had been sent to augment the slave labor of the engenhos, "quilombos were growing at
an alarming rate all over the province by the turn of the nineteenth century. The
fugitive slaves moreover were no longer avoiding even the towns, sometimes hiding
within them and at other times 'descending to loot them.' "20y Hausa were also implicated in the urban revolts of September 1808 and January 1809 that occurred in the
Jaguaripe township and Bahia, respectively. A plantation revolt in the Bahian suburb
of Itapoan, which broke out in late February 1814, also involved Hausa slaves. In
December 1826, though, it was Yoruba (Nagos) refugees who abandoned Bahia to
establish a quilombo at Urubu. Ramos writes:
The leading figure in this conflict was a black woman, Zeferina, who was ultimately
subdued and her arms taken from her. The confession of some of those captured
made it clear that the Negroes had planned a much more elaborate uprising,
repercussions of which were to be felt in the future.210
Again, it was Yoruba who were the basis for the urban revolt that broke out in Bahia
in April 1830:
A number of Yorubas broke into the hardware stores, from which they took arms
and ammunition, proceeded then to the arming of some hundred more Negroes,
and with this considerable band, attacked the police station of Soledade in one of
the city's suburbs. Taken completely by surprise, the authorities were helpless.
Before aid could be secured and a force organized, the Negroes wrought destruction in the city. The insurrectionists were finally put down with a large loss of life,
some fifty perishing and as many more taken prisoners. The rest fled into the
fastnesses of the ~ilderness.~"
However, the great revolt of 1835 in Bahia, Ramos continues, was primarily a Hausa
revolt and consequently Islamic in inspiration. "Their aggressiveness was a direct
social heritage from the century old wars of religion which had assured the spread of

154 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

Islam in Africa. . . . The preponderant cause, let it be repeated, was religious."212Kent
argues in contrast to Ramos (and Nina Rodrigues) that this revolt involved Hausa and
Yoruba, primarily, but was led by Islamic leaders, the Males. Neither this revolt nor
those that preceded it were holy wars (querra santos).
There was . . . no doubt that "nearly all" of the insurgents knew how to read and
write in unknown script, probably Arabic and used among the Ussas (Hausa) who
appeared "to have now united with the Nagos." . . . A total of 234 reached the trial
stage, but under the conditions of arrest it is not really possible to ascertain how
many of these had been actually involved. . . . Nonetheless the Nagos, Hausa, Nupe
(Tapas), Geges, and "Bornus" (Kanuri) accounted for 213 alone. The total included
14 women.213
Ramos and Nina Rodrigues, Kent suggests, erred in relying too much on the trial
records of the defeated slaves and the personal papers and reports of Bahia's police
chief, Goncalves Martins. Both sources were biased by the presumption that "every
Muslim was a rebel and every rebel a Muslim."214"The Male-led revolt of 1835," Kent
concludes, "will be understood in all of its aspects only through a most minute study
of data relating to the intra-African relations within Bahia itself."215
Irrespective of the scholars' "debate" it is quite clear that the revolts were grounded
on the syncretics of African cultural and ideological materials. Ramos, Nina Rodrigues, and Kent mention the Yoruba's secret society, Obgoni, as a source of that group's
militancies, and everyone seems agreed that Islam played a tactical and strategic role
in those movements for which the Hausa were directly responsible.216In the 1835
rebellion particularly, the warning issued by the Count of Arcos, one-time governor
of Bahia (1810-i8), appears to have been fully realized:
The mightiest guarantee for the security of large Brazilian towns is the incompatibility of various African nations for if they ever overlook the enmity which naturally disunites them, those of Agomes will become brothers with the Nagos, the
Geges with the Aussas, the Tapas with Sentys, and in this way the great and
inevitable peril will darken and devastate Brazil. And, there is no doubt that
misfortune can bring about the brotherhood of the unfortunate.217
As it happened, the "misfortune" was the Industrial Revolution and the further
development of the capitalist world system. Together their need for primitive accumulation translated into slavery on a massive scale. In Bahia in 1835, the inevitable
result was "the brotherhood of the unfortunate."
Resistance in the British West lndies

In the same decades of the nineteenth century, the world system showed a very
different and apparently contradictory face to the British West Indies. In Jamaica, and
the older colonies, no combination of the events that were proving so fortunate for

HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

I55

Brazil, Cuba, and other sugar-producing areas seemed to favor the colonial sugar
producers. Having lost domination of the sugar market in the latter half of the previous century, their fortunes continued to plummet, buffeted by such diverse occurrences as market glut, drought, soil depletion, overproduction, and the re-routing of
capital. Even the power of the West Indian planters was seen to turn against its
possessors: the mercantilist trade restrictions that had preserved the English "home
market" for them now became the limit to which they were bound. Technology even
railed against them with the development by French interests of beet sugar to challenge the cane.218Eric Williams reported:
Bankruptcies were the order of the day. Between 1799 and 1807, 65 plantations in
Jamaica were abandoned, 32 were sold for debts, and in 1807 suits were pending
against 115 others. Debt, disease and death were the only topics of conversation in
the island. A parliamentary committee set up in 1807 discovered that the British
West Indian planter was producing at a loss. . . . The committee attributed the main
evil to the unfavorable state of the foreign market. In 1806 the surplus of sugar in
England amounted to six thousand tons. Production had to be curtailed.219
More specifically, as Williams continued, it became clear that with the exception of
Barbados, the older colonies were in decline. The newer colonies seemed to be replacing them in sugar production.
Between 1813 and 1833 Jamaica's production declined by nearly one-sixth; the exports of Antigua, Nevis and Tobago by more than one-quarter, St. Kitts by nearly
one-half, St. Lucia's by two-thirds, St. Vincent's by one-sixth, Grenada's by almost
one-eighth. Dominica's exports showed a slight increase, while Barbados almost
doubled in its exports. On the other hand, the output of the newer colonies
increased, British Guiana's by two and a half times, Trinidad's by ~ n e - t h i r d . ~ ~ ~
Trinidad's increase in productivity was less an indication of the new targets of opportunity for British capital than of the problems being encountered in the older colonies. Curacao, St. Eustatius, Saba, St. Martin, Tortola, Tobago, Grenada, and St.
Vincent, Williams notes, were or were becoming "barren islands," their soils devastated by careless sugar cultivation.221Their planters found the transfer of slaves and
other forms of capital to Trinidad both necessary and convenient.222Trinidad's shortage of labor, a problem acute enough to arrest the full utilization of its fertile soil,
could only be addressed in this fashion after the abolition of the slave trade.
British Guiana, on the other hand, represented an occasion for the massive reproduction of new capital.
Guyana had already progressed far while under Dutch control, containing twice as
many slaves and producing twice the tonnage of sugar of Trinidad and Mauritius
combined. But Guyana also contained large areas suitable for cultivation by those
who did not wish to work on the estates.223

156 R O O T S O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

Jamaica, however, was the key. With half the total population of the British West
Indies, Jamaica's sugar planters claimed one-third of the sugar produced in British
It was Jamaica's deteriorating role in the world economy that would set
the forces of industrial capital against slave economics.
In 1807, according to Higman, the Jamaican slave population was around 350,000,
the white population one-tenth as large, the freedmen even less numerous.225In 1832,
both the slave populations and the whites had decreased to 312,876 and 25,000,
respectively, while the freedman population had increased to 3 5 , 0 0 0 . ~The
~ ~ resident
whites, however, were hardly the "white ruling class" that Mary Reckord supposes.227
Craton writes: "[Albsenteeism had become the rule for West Indian estates by the
middle of the eighteenth century."228The most successful planters: the Beckfords, the
Hibberts, the Longs, the Gladstones, the Codringtons, the Warners, the Pinneys, the
Marryats, returned to England once their accumulations allowed it.229"Thereafter,"
Craton suggests, "the plantations were in the hands of overseers and attorneys, the
most mediocre members of the imperial middle class." They
had nothing but their color and a rudimentary ability to write accounts to distinguish them from the most assimilated of the creole blacks. They were an embattled, embittered class with few inner resources to resist the temptations of petty
tyranny or the trauma of alienation. . . .
Many plantation whites sank into a hopeless moral torpor, eating, drinking, and
fornicating themselves into an early grave. Some of those kept on estates "to save
the deficiency" were so base that even Edward Long had to record that they were
heartily despised by what he called the "better sort" of slaves.230
A few planters remained, living in towns "or in a Great House," but "[alt best, the
politest society in the West Indies was a pale and philistine imitation of life in the
metropolis."231
In England, the decline of the profitability of British West Indian sugar in the
second half of the eighteenth century was countered by an effort to end the slave
trade. Without the trade, Williams recounts, it was believed that France's colonial
economy would collapse. English capital, that is its emerging industrial faction, was
no longer obligated to a colonial empire. "Colonial independence was cheaper." Free
trade and capital accumulation had become the means of further capitalist development, relegating primitive accumulation to a secondary role. Industrial capitalists
and their humanitarian ideologues, initially costumed in nationalist Francophobia,
were by the end of the eighteenth century prepared to meet West Indian interest on
the field:
The attack falls into three phases: the attack on the slave trade, the attack on slavery,
the attack on the preferential sugar duties. The slave trade was abolished in 1807,
slavery in 1833, the sugar preference in 1846. The three events are inseparable. The
very vested interests which had been built up by the slave system now turned and

HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

157

destroyed the system. The humanitarians, in attacking the system in its weakest and
most indefensible spot, spoke a language that the masses could understand. They
could never have succeeded a hundred years before when every important capitalist interest was on the side of the colonial system.232
This struggle, however, was not confined to Parliamentary acts, or limited to public
discussion in the British Isles. As it proceeded toward the capture of the English
public and the domination of state policy, its heat radiated out to the peripheries of
the British mercantilist Empire. In the West Indies, colonial papers rehearsed the
controversy, colonial assemblies hysterically and vehemently denounced their opponents, and public debate anticipated what could only be understood as the end of the
colonial order. The African slaves in the British West Indies, of course, were also
listening, a quieter party whose interest in these questions was as profound as any
other. Having been given little occasion or opportunity to articulate their position,
some secured for themselves an older form of expression: rebellion.
The immediate catalyst for slave rebellions in the British West Indies was the Slave
Registry. Initially, the Registry had been promulgated to the Colonial Office as an
instrument of slave reforms. In 1812, James Stephens, the Colonial Office lawyer,
acting on behalf of "the inner circle of emancipists:' had argued that:
This moderate reform . . . would serve four purposes: to ascertain whether illegal
slave importations were still occurring despite the abolition acts, to provide accurate statistics concerning slave mortality and fertility (by so doing further to publicize slave conditions), and thus to provoke further reforms.233
In 1815, a parliamentary campaign resulted in the first Order-in-Council for the
Registry. The registration of slaves could now proceed in the Crown colonies (those
without assemblies), and colonial governors would encourage colonial assemblies to
enact their own registration procedures. The planters, however, recognized the Registry for what it was: an initiative to destroy the slave system. "Resisted by the planters
even in Trinidad, implementation was delayed in the Guyanas, and in Jamaica it was
categorically rejected."234Four months into 1816, in Barbados, it became clear that the
Africans also recognized the import of the Registry:
The rebellion broke out with shocking suddenness on Easter Sunday night, 14 April
1816, at a time when the slaves were free from work and had ample opportunities
for organization under cover of the permitted festivities. Cane-field and cane-trash
houses were fired as beacons in the south-eastern parishes, particularly St. Philip,
one of the driest areas, with the highest ratio of slaves to whites. Up to seventy
estates were affected. . . . Only 2 whites were killed in the fighting but probably
about loo slaves, with a further 144 executed, 170 deported, and innumerable
floggings. Roaming slaves were shot on sight and Negro houses burned. . . . Captives were commonly tortured. . . . Convicted rebels were publicly executed in
different parts of the island and their bodies-sometimes just their heads-in many
cases exposed on their home estates.235
158 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

In the minds of some Barbadian planters, there was little doubt of the cause. Letters
published in the London Times soon after the rebellion were furious:
We have to thank the projectors of the registry bill for this. It seems, the poor
deluded negroes took it into their heads, that they were so far emancipated by the
British parliament, as to be allowed three days each week to themselves; and when
their owners refused to comply with the demand, they almost immediately commenced burning the estates.
Another writer anticipated:
This is the first instance of perhaps many yet to come of the fatal tendency to peace
and security ofthose islands of the projected registry bill brought into the House of
Commons last year. Such a result was naturally to be expected from any such
measure of impolitic interference on the part of government at home between our
legislatures and the slave population; but no one expected to taste its bitter fruit at
so early a period. . . . [Tlhe principal instigators of this insurrection, who are
negroes of the worst dispositions, but superior understandings, and some ofwhom
can read and write, availed themselves of this parliamentary interference, and the
public anxiety it occasioned, to instil into the minds of the slaves generally a belief
that they were already freed by the king and parliament.
And Sir James Leith, governor of the island, in a lengthy and extraordinary "Address
to the Slave Population of the Island of Barbados" warned:
I have learned that a general belief had been mischievously propagated among you,
that I was in possession of your manumissions, and that my return to Barbadoes
would have put you in possession of your freedom. I can solemnly assure you, that
my arrival has been one of the most painful periods of my life; when, in performing
my duty, I have not only had to inform you of the cruel deception which the enemies
of the state, and still more your own bitter foes, have practiced on both, but to feel
myself called on by the offended laws to seek out and still to punish the
The governor, though he did "not mean to enter into the origin and nature of slavery,"
assured his audience that "Slavery is not the institution of any particular colour, age
or country," and that "Great Britain alone exerts her power to prevent an increase of
slavery, and to render those who are now unavoidably in that state every practicable
service which benevolence suggests." The Africans who participated in what they
called the Bussa Rebellion knew the situation differently from the governor. They had
the "Mingo" revolution (Haiti) as their model, their source of aid, and they knew
their benefactor, Great Britain, required their active assistance in the struggle against
slavery. Craton reports:
Robert, of Simmon's estate . . . said that Nanny Grigg, "a negro woman at Simmon's
who said she could read," had put round a rumour late in 1815 that all the slaves
were to be freed on New Year's Day, and that:
HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY O F THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

159

"she said she had read it in the Newspapers, and that her Master was very uneasy
at it: that she was always talking about it to the negroes, and told them that they
were all damn fools to work, for that she would not, as freedom they were sure to
get. That about a fortnight after New-year's Day, she said the negroes were to be
freed on Easter Monday, and the only way to get it was to fight for it, otherwise they
would not get it; and the way they were to do, was to set fire, as that was the way
they did in Saint Doming01'~~'
The Registry, though, was only the immediate cause, slavery the more enduring one.
Recall, almost one hundred years earlier, in Jamaica, another Nanny, the leader of the
Windward Maroons, had similarly distinguished herself.238The first Nanny had left
her name on the map of Jamaica, Nanny Town, but her other "possessions" she
shared. Among them were the ethos of the Black radical tradition. Of course, it had
not really belonged to her. Indeed, if possession were ever at issue, it would be the
other way around. The tradition had produced her as it did the Nanny of Barbados.
It was the Registry again that served as a catalyst in the next large slave rebellion
in the British West Indies. Its implementation delayed for a number of years, the
reforms with which it was associated did not come into play until the early 1820s in
some of the colonies. For Guiana, the sting of slave reform was felt in 1823. The
reaction of the planters was, as usual, vocal, unrestrained, and public. In a population
that consisted of 77,000 slaves, 3,500 whites and 2,500 freedmen, the debate was
socially disastrous.239
Guiana's rich soil had been the basis for the intensive application of sugar cultivat i ~ n . ~For
~ Othe slaves, this had the result of appreciably subverting the conditions
under which they labored.241Discipline, prosecuted by an ever-vigilant white minority, was harsh and often arbitrary. The cruelty that the planters found necessary
inevitably exceeded the latitudes indulged by the more humanitarian fractions of the
plantocratic society. Some, it seems, found it impossible to restrain from criticizing
the planters' open hostility toward the British Parliament and the Colonial Office, and
their disregard for the minimal interests of the enslaved population. One of their
numbers, the London Missionary Society's pastor, John Smith, was particularly vocal
in the characterization of planter greed, what he perceived to be their treasonous
claims, and their unchristian attitudes toward their human property.242A slave rebellion broke out in August, 1823. Fifty estates and perhaps as many as 30,000 Africans
were involved. In two weeks, it was over: two whites killed, loo slaves lulled with the
executions of many others to follow. In the next five months, rebels were tracked
down, executed, and in some instances tried. Among its victims, the reaction claimed
John Smith. Smith died in prison of consumption. Quamina, a rebel leader whose
association with Smith was as chief deacon, "was tracked down with Indians and
dogs, shot on loth September, and gibbeted at the roadside in front of [Gladstone's]
Success estate."243The planters and the British Parliament blamed the missionary and
the Registry for the rebellion, but not slavery. Following that logic, Craton notes:
"The overall effect was to slow the pace of emancipationi~m."~~~
160 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

Finally, among those rebellions that had their immediate inspirations in the abolitionist controversies and the slave registry, there is Jamaica. Three large and immediately imposing volumes, originally amassed by the Colonial Office concerning this
event, rest in Britain's Public Records Office at Kew Gardens. They contain the official
records from Jamaica of the trials of 626 men and women who took part in the "Slave
Rebellion of 1831."~~~
In the varied pens of the colonial recorders of the several counties and court martials of the island, they announce charge, testimony, disposition,
and the occupational and bonded particularities of those Blacks who survived a more
immediate expression of justice (officiallythere had been 207 slaves killed during the
suppression of the rebellion).246Since the overriding concern was with identifiable
culpability they tell us more about the networks constructed among the slaves than
the reasons they had for engineering these lattices of exchanges. They also tell us more
about the configuration of the slaves in the eyes of that "mediocrity" of the colonial
middle class than the vision of the slaves themselves, and of themselves. Lastly, since
these documents are the primary sources for such historians of the rebellion as
Craton, Reckord, and Patterson, and even played a part in contemporary reports such
as those of Henry Bleby, they have had another significance: the construction of the
events is that bequeathed by the interrogator^.^^^ "[O]verseers and attorneys-turnedmilitiamen," Mary Reckord characterized them, intent on "not only restoring order,
but vengeance for their losses and humiliation."248Not to be outdone, Craton has
written of "the plantocratic psyche" as the source of their reactions to the rebellion,
"their emphasis on rape," as a motive among the slaves, "a deep sexual insecurity."249
Patterson has asserted that they were "selfish and incompetent," their "attitude toward slave revolts oscillated between extreme hysteria and unbelievable smugness."250
Why, then, would its historians leave the identity of the slaves' activities in Jamaica in
1831in such hands?
Perhaps the answer lies in the seductiveness of the account that emerges. In toto,
the trials' records, which resulted in the executions of 312 slaves, assert the existence of
a "Christmas Rebellion" in 1831, so named because the rebellion broke out on Monday
evening, 27 December. Popularly known as the "Baptist War," the victors' inquiries
indicated its leaders were Samuel ("Daddy Ruler") Sharpe, George Taylor, George
Guthrie, and Johnson, Thomas Dove, Robert Gardner, Dehaney, and Tharp of the
Black Regiment.251Planning for the rebellion had begun in August and had almost
been betrayed by a series of incidents at the Salt Spring estate near Montego Bay and
three estates in Trelawny parish several days prior to the planned outbreak. In its
postmortem, the Jamaican assembly's commission of inquiry attributed the rebellion
to several causes: the debate on the abolition of slavery that opened in the House of
Commons in April; the Baptist, Wesleyan, and Moravian missionaries active especially in St. James's parish and Montego Bay, the centers of the rebellion; and rumors
of a "free paper" issued by King William, manumitting the slaves, that was believed by
slaves either to have been withheld by local whites or arriving with the returning
. ~ ~all~ a very neatly drawn scenario. AugBaptist missionary, Thomas B ~ r c h e 1 1 In
mented later by the attribution of Christian millenarian elements, the emergence of a
HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

161

"clever," "relatively privileged elite" of slaves to lead such a rebellion, and situational
factors ("slave density," geography, absenteeism, for instances), the actions of the
slaves became entirely familiar and under~tandable.~~~
It does appear, though, that what has been constructed as a single rebellion was at
least two such actions and maybe even several. For one, the rebellion with which
Sharpe and his Baptist associates were identified was centered around the environs of
Montego Bay and was pursued by its planners as a form of sit-down strike:
Sharpe, according to the account he gave the Wesleyan missionary, Henry Bleby,
who had several conversations with him when he was in jail, did not plan armed
rebellion, but mass passive resistance. After the Christmas holidays when the cane
harvest was due to begin, the slaves were to sit down and refuse to work until their
masters acknowledged that they were free men and agreed to pay them wages.
Sharpe expected that the whites would try to intimidate the strikers by shooting
hostages as examples; but the slaves were not expected to fight back, simply to
continue passive resistance.254
Sharpe, credited with a near-charismatic presence in the colonial inquiries-Bleby
said Sharpe had "the feelings and passions of his hearers completely at his command,"255was apparently incapable of securing complete adherence to what W. L.
Burn appropriately characterized as "a skeleton plot for a strike after C h r i s t m a ~ . "In~ ~ ~
part, this seems to have been a consequence of his having to work through mission
networks to which only some slaves were culturally and ideologically identified.
Since his ideological material, according to Reckord, "was no doubt the language of
radical Methodists in England:' there were many slaves in the five parishes of concern
who were not sympathetic to that tradition.257Seen from the perspective of the
Christian missions:
The religious groups among the slaves fell into three categories: groups consisting
chiefly of mission members meeting on the estates and modelling themselves
primarily on the mission churches; groups formed by mission converts, often
church leaders, among slaves who did not attend mission churches; and thirdly,
groups run by leaders who were independent of the missions, or repudiated them
outright, while associating themselves with christianity-these latter tending to call
themselves Baptists, "native" or "spirit" Baptists.258
The influence of Sharpe and his Baptist co-conspirators, then, was largely confined to
those slaves whose conversion to Christianity had prepared them for passive resistance and sacrifice. Some slaves within that tradition, however, found such a position unacceptable. They chose instead armed revolt. John Fray was obviously one
of those:
The day before the Works were burnt John Fray said to John Gardiner [the Head
Man], I see some of these people loolung sulky, but if they do not join in the
Freedom, and the Fire, we will cut off their Heads and make them we Negroes.259
161 R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

Still others relied on the older tradition among them, the one that had sustained
rebellion and marronage.
In the interior of western Jamaica, inspired by Sharpe's initiative, facilitated by the
agitation and networks drawn by Sharpe and his colleagues, Johnson operating from
the Retrieve estate, Gardner from the Greenwich, Dehany and Tharp organized an
armed revolt. They chose to forego passive resistance and banded together to form
the Black Regiment. Their model it would appear was drawn from the British West
India Regiments organized between 1808 and 1815 but by now largely disbanded.
Though most of the Blacks recruited for the nine regiments had come from Sierra
Leone, a few had come from the West Indies, some had even been rebels held in the
slave jail in Kingston. The West India Regiments had fought against the Napoleonic
armies in the West Indies (in some instances Blacks had commanded white troops)
and Black troops were still present in the Jamaican garrison at the time of the rebelli~n.~~O
In any case, some slaves had taken to the field of battle quite comfortable
with a military tradition:
The rebels' military core was the Black regiment, about one hundred and fifty
strong with fifty guns among them. The Black Regiment, under the command of
Colonel Johnson of Retrieve estate, fought a successful action on the 28th of
December 1831 against the Western Interior militia, which had retreated from its
barracks in the interior to Old Montpelier estate, near Montego Bay. From there,
the Black Regiment forced a further retreat to Montego Bay and put the country
between Montego Bay, Lucea and Savannah-la-Mar in rebel hands. The Black
Regiment then carried rebellion into the hills, invading estates and inviting recruits, burning properties on the border of St. James and setting off a trail of fires
through the Great River Valley in Westmoreland and St. E l i ~ a b e t h . ~ ~ ~
Of course, Johnson, Gardner, Dove, Dehany, and Tharp-all Baptists-were among
the Black Regiment's commanders. "Their work was supplemented by the activity of
self-appointed leaders who took the opportunity to roam the country collecting
recruits, looting and destroying and intimidating other slaves, enjoying a little brief
authority:' Reckord has written.262One such man was John Linton. And according to
Angus McCail's testimony, Linton's appeal was simple and direct: "Angus McCail, I
am surprised at you, to go and join the White people, don't you want freedom as well
as me[?]"263Some slaves, though as Reckord correctly contends, "were intimidated
and returned to work." For thousands of others this was not the case. Within two
weeks, however, short of arms and experience, the armed rebellion "was virtually at
an end."
Nevertheless, depending on the authority consulted, 20,000 to 60,000 slaves were
taken up in the rebellion.264Moreover, Reckord, who has written about the rebellion
in most detail, asserts,
Most of the estates involved in the rebellion were neither part of the rebels' rudimentary military organization, nor organized for passive resistance. Their rebelHISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

163

lion consisted chiefly in the destruction of white property, and a brief heady
disregard for routine combined with assertions of freedom.265
From among them, maroon units were formed and for two months, long after the
suppression of the Black Regiment, they continued to resist the military, and the now
emboldened colonial militia.266Given the framework of the trial records we know too
little of these slaves' activities beyond the fact that many of them ended up like David
Atkinson, "the Shell Blower," whose trial disposition read: "Hanged by the Neck, ti1 he
is dead, dead, dead."267Just how many can never be known. But the official parish
returns were horrible enough: 626 tried, 312 executed, 300 flogged, imprisoned for life
or transported. In this tragic record, however, the slave societies of the West Indies
had also written their own end. In their brutal repression, their flirtations with
treason against the Empire, and their ruthless campaigns against the missionaries,
they had overplayed their hand, lending their own resources to the cause of the
slaves.268By 1838, slavery in the British Empire had been officially abolished by a Parliament now "reformed" to enhance the power of industrial
"The slaves:'
Mary Reckord reports, "had demonstrated to some at least of those in authority that
it could prove more dangerous and expensive to maintain the old system than to
abolish it."270And similar moments were to occur in the United States in 1863 and 25
years later in Brazil.271Still, Michael Craton has a point when he concludes:
Slave rebellions were heroic, but heroic failure. Antonio Gramsci would doubtless
have pointed out the ways in which the plantocracy re-formed its ranks, and
metropolitan capital simply changed its tune, so that they continued to rule for
at least a hundred years after 1838. Formal Emancipation was little more than
a hegemonic trick. New forms of slavery were instituted by importing Asiatic
"coolies" or simply wage slavery.272
The list, of course, should not have ended with wage slavery. It properly should also
include peonage, sharecropping, tenant-farming, forced labor, penal labor, and modern peasantry. Nevertheless, we must also remind ourselves that whatever the forms
primitive accumulation assumed, its social harvest would also include acts of resistance, rebellion, and, ultimately, revolution. In the peripheral and semi-peripheral
regions of the modern world system, at least, Gramsci's hegemonic class rule was
never to be more than a momentary presence.273
Africa: Revolt at the Source

In Africa itself, the same historical tradition was no less apparent in the nineteenth
century. But we must also keep in mind the warning issued by C. L. R. James and
George Padmore that it was the colonial habit not to maintain a very close record of
these events:
The difficulty. . . is to get accounts written in any detail. The British send out their
punitive expeditions against revolting tribes and do not necessarily mention them
164 R O O T S O F BLACK R A D I C A L I S M

in the annual colonial reports. But if the revolt awakens public interest, a commission will investigate and make a report. This report will frequently clash violently
with the accounts of participants, eye-witnesses, correspondents of newspapers,
native and European, and persons living in the colony at the time. The French and
Belgians, however, publish little of this kind.274
One ofthe several consequences of this habit and the intent behind it was to produce a
companion academic literature that acted, as B. Magubane asserts, "as a powerful mystification of the real social forces at
NO "image of the colonial social structure" emerged in the literature, Magubane maintains. Lucy Mair, speaking in behalf of
her anthropologist colleagues who mined the British colonial fields, thought the reason quite obvious: "I think one has to answer the comment that we concentrated on
'the village' or 'the people' and took for granted the external sources of the changes that
we documented. I think the reason is simply that one cannot do both at once."276However, she also admitted: "None of us, it is true, held that colonial rule ought to come to
an immediate end. Who did in those days?"277For Mair, the hub of the District Commissioner's job was "securing an adequate labour supply" for European employers and
preservation ofthe peace: "Lest it be thought that 'the preservation ofpeace' means the
suppression of rebellion, it was much more concerned with the assaults of Africans on
one another."278Such scholars as Mair, to generalize Magubane's observation, were
hardly possessed with the mind-set to "see colonialism as a force and a social process,
[rather than] as given, as an existential reality like a landscape."279
The European presence in Africa at the beginning of the century had been largely
confined to a few settlements in southern Africa and to trading posts and factors on
the northern, western, and eastern coasts. Even by mid-century, James and Padmore
assert: "it is unlikely that more than one tenth of Africa was in European hands."280
Nevertheless, the century had opened with resistance. In southern Africa, the Xhosas'
Hundred Years War (1779-1880) with the white colonists was already into its third
decade. Before its obviously impermanent conclusion, it would take this people as
deeply into the historical tradition as any Black people, even the Haitians, had dared.
The "Nongquase" or Cattle-Killing of 1856-57, which resulted in the deaths of tens of
thousands of Xhosas by self-inflicted starvation, continues to evade Western comprehension.281The Zulu, too, came to the point of military resistance. From the
emergence of the Zulu state in the early decades of the century to the wars of the 1870s
and ~goos,the Zulu fought the disruption of their material and spiritual being. Eight
thousand Zulu fell in battle in 1879 alone, the same year that the Assegais defeated the
gun in the terrible encounter at Isandhlwana. Thirty years later, as the new century
opened, the Zulu rose up once again.282As the century progressed, the European
intrusion became more marked and resistances more numerous.
In Angola, the Portuguese fought wars of pacification in the 1850s and the 1880s.'~~
In present-day Tanzania, the Yao and Hehe in the 1890s confronted the Germans who
transgressed the bounds of good manners. Machemba, the Yao general, had written
to them in Swahili: "If it should be friendship that you desire, then I am ready for it,
HISTORICAL ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

16%

today and always; but to be your subject, that I cannot be."284In the 1870s in West
Africa, the Ashanti began their wars with the British; in the 1890sthe Mendi of Sierra
Leone did the same. And in 1896, as a complement to the achievement of the Haitian
slaves one hundred years earlier, Manelik I1 of Ethiopia mounted an army of loo,ooo
in order to defeat the Italian invader. There were, of course, many others: the Yoruba
of West Africa, the Baganda of East Africa, the peoples of the Atlas Mountains in the
North, the Shona, Ndebele, Ndlambe, and Ngqika of the
Many of them had
to wait a long time for their celebration, many are still waiting.
It was, though, the pattern, the construction, the evolving form that was and is
most interesting. The historical integration that the slave trade had accomplished
almost instantaneously in the New World was now occurring on the African continent. Discrete societies were slowly achieving the social organization that the attack
on colonialism required. Terence Ranger, though not entirely comfortable with the
"supra-rational" elements to which we have attended, thought such movements "eminently utilitarian":
The resistances were a defiance of a power which enjoyed great technological
superiority and began with a superiority of morale based upon it and upon confidence in its ability to shape the world. The religious leaders were able to oppose to
this a morale which for the moment was as confident, if not more so, based upon
their supposed ability to shape the world; and they were able to oppose to modern
weapons the one great advantage that the Africans possessed, that of numbers. In
no other way could the African peoples of the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries . . . have offered a challenge to the Europeans. Moreover the so-called
"superstitious" injunctions of the religious leaders not only served the purpose of
creating a sense of the new society but also ensured the minimum of discipline
essential in movements such as these.286
This achievement as a structural phenomenon was a concomitant of the world system
and the imperialist expansion that it demanded. Its coherence, however, was based on
the African identities of its peoples. As a structural process, its dynamics were seated
in the very expansion of imperialism. This was the dialectic of imperialism and
liberation, the contradiction that compelled the appearance of resistance and revolution out of the condition of oppression-even from its ideology. As Michael Taussig
has written with early colonial Colombia in mind:
The scanty accounts of Christianization suggest that conversion and consolidation
of belief remained little more than a formality throughout the entire epoch of
slavery. Indeed . . . the slaveowners regarded Christianized slaves as more rebellious and as poorer workers than those not indoctrinated, and would pay less for
them. . . . Black popular religion could hardly endorse slavery and all it implied, nor
could the slaves remain content with equality in God's eyes but not in their
The peoples of Africa and the African diaspora had endured an integrating experience
that left them not only with a common task but a shared vision.
166

R O O T S OF B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

Our first step is relatively easy because it was always there, always indicated, in the
histories of the radical tradition. Again and again, in the reports, casual memoirs,
official accounts, eye-witness observations, and histories of each of the tradition's
episodes, fiom the sixteenth century to the events recounted in last week's or last
month's journals, one note has occurred and recurred: the absence of mass violence.'
Western observers, often candid in their amazement, have repeatedly remarked that
in the vast series of encounters between Blacks and their oppressors, only some of
which have been recounted above, Blacks have seldom employed the level of violence
that they (the Westerners) understood the situation required.*When we recall that in
the New World of the nineteenth century the approximately 60 whites lulled in the
Nat Turner insurrection was one of the largest totals for that century; when we recall
that in the massive uprisings of slaves in 1831 in Jamaica-where 300,000 slaves lived
under the domination of30,ooo whites-only 14 white casualties were reported, when
in revolt after revolt we compare the massive and often indiscriminate reprisals of the
civilized master class (the employment of terror) to the scale of violence of the slaves
(and at present their descendants), at least one impression is that a very different and
. ~ did Nat
shared order of things existed among these brutally violated p e ~ p l e Why
Turner, admittedly a violent man, spare poor whites? Why did Toussaint escort his
absent "master's" family to safety before joining the slave revolution? Why was "no
white person killed in a slave rebellion in colonial Virgi~~ia"?~
Why would Edmund
Morgan or Gerald Mullin argue that slave brutality was directly related to acculturation, "that the more slaves came to resemble the indigent freemen whom they disEvery century it was the same. The people
placed, the more dangerous they be~ame"?~
with Chilembwe in 1915 force-marched European women and children to the safety of
colonist ~ettlement.~
And in that tradition, in the 1930S, James ambivalently found
Dessalines wanting for his transgressions of the tradition. Dessalines was a military
genius, yes. He was shrewd, cunning, but he was also a man whose hatred had to be
kept "in ~heck."~
There was violence of course, but in this tradition it most often was turned inward:
the active against the passive, or as was the case of the Nongquase of 1856, the
community against its material aspect. This was not "savagery" as the gentlemensoldiers of nineteenth- and twentieth-century European armies arrogantly reported
to their beloved publics at home. Neither was it the "fratricide" of Fanon's extended
Fre~dianism.~
And only seldom was it the devouring "revolutionary terror" of the
"international bourgeois democratic revolution" that Genovese's neo-Marxism has
led him to ackn~wledge.~
This violence was not inspired by an external object, it was
not understood as a part of an attack on a system, or an engagement with an abstraction of oppressive structures and relations. Rather it was their "Jonestown," our
Nongquase: The renunciation of actual being for historical being; the preservation of
the ontological totality granted by a metaphysical system that had never allowed
for property in either the physical, philosophical, temporal, legal, social, or psychic
senses. For them defeat or victory was an internal affair. Like those in the 1950s who
took to the mountains and forests of Kenya to become the Land and Freedom Army,
168 R O O T S O F B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M

the material or "objective" power of the enemy was irrelevant to their destinies. His
machines, which flung metal missiles, his vessels of smoke, gas, fire, disease, all were
of lesser relevance than the integral totality of the people themselves. This was what
Chilembwe meant when he entreated his people to "strike a blow and die." This is
what all the Jakobos in all the thousands of Chishawashas and at all the tens of
thousands of beer-parties that dot the Black world have been saying for tens of
generations: "we had only ourselves to blame for defeat."1° This was a revolutionary
consciousness that proceeded from the whole historical experience of Black people
and not merely from the social formations of capitalist slavery or the relations of
production of colonialism.
It becomes clear, then, that for the period between the mid-sixteenth and midnineteenth centuries, it was an African tradition that grounded collective resistance
by Blacks to slavery and colonial imperialism. This is precisely what Gerald Mullin
discovered and wrote about in his study of Blacks in eighteenth-century Virginia.
There he concluded:
Whatever the precise meaning of procurement for the African as a person, his
fellowship or affectivity, a core area of human behavior, remained intact as a slave.
Africans, assuming that resistance was a group activity, ran off with their own
countrymen, and American-born slaves including m ~ l a t t o e s . ~ ~
Further on, he would make the point again, only differently and more to our immediate point: " 'Outlandish' Africans often reacted to their new condition by attempting
to escape, either to return to Africa or to form settlements of fugitives to recreate their
old life in the new land. These activities were not predicated upon the Africans'
experience of plantation life, but on a total rejection of their lot."12 Such was the stuff
from which legends were made among the Africans. Where to deny to one's self the
eating of salt (the "ocean-sea"?) was a guarantee of the retention of the power to fly,
really fly, home.13 All of it was a part of a tradition that was considerably different
from what was made of the individualistic and often spontaneous motives that energized the runaway, the arsonist, the poisoner. It more easily sustained suicide than
assault, and its ideological, psycho-social, cultural, and historical currencies were
more charismatic than political. When its actualization was frustrated, it became
obeah, voodoo, myalism, pocomania-the religions of the oppressed as Vittorio Lanternari put it.I4When it was realized, it could become the Palmares, the Bush Negro
settlements, and, at its heights, Haiti. But always, its focus was on the structures of the
mind. Its epistemology granted supremacy to metaphysics not the material.
It was the mind, metaphysics, ideology, consciousness that was Mackandel's tool in
mid-eighteenth-century Haiti. He persuaded the Blacks and their masters to sense the
hatred of the slaves in palpable terms. Ordinary precautions were irrelevant, what the
slaves could be physically obstructed from accomplishing was unimportant. Their
hatred was a material force, capable of snuffing the lives from masters who had gone
so far as to import their foods from France and had unloaded the precious cargo with
their own hands. It was the same with Hyacinth. His army could rush the cannon of
NATURE O F THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

I69

the French forces "without fear or care for the volleys," shoving their arms into the
cannons' mouths. They knew, they believed that "if they were killed they would wake
again in Africa." On that final day of March 1792,z,ooo of them "died," to a mere loo
of their opponents, but they were doubly blessed: they won the battle and even their
dead were free.15 Boukman possessed the same truth. And so did Romaine. Nanny,
who had preceded her Haitian sister by sixty years, was warmed in her mountainous
retreat in Jamaica by that very same consciousness. They lived on their terms, they
died on their terms, they obtained their freedom on their terms. Thus it was with
obeahmen and obeahwomen, and papaloi. These were the terms that these African
peasants and farmers had brought with them to their captivity. They were also the
only terms in which their freedom could be acquired. At Richmond, Virginia, in the
summer of 1800, Gabriel had not quite realized this vision, but his George Smith did.
Smith believed in Africa and knew of the "outlandish people," that they dealt with
"Witches and Wizards, and thus [would be] useful in Armies to tell when any calamity was about to befall them."16 In 1822 in Charleston, South Carolina, Denmark Vesey
realized it, but his Gullah Jack knew it too little. And in 1830, old Nat brought it
to fruition.
Only Nat Turner, who charged his plan with supernatural signs, and sacred, poetic
language that inspired action, was able to transcend the world of the plantation and
the city. Only Turner led a "sustained" insurrection."
It could not be otherwise. This is what the Black radical tradition made manifest. It
was a consciousness implicated in what Amos Tutuola so many generations later
would name "the bush of the gh~sts.'''~
In the twentieth century, when Black radical
thinkers had acquired new habits of thought in keeping, some of them supposed,
with the new conditions of their people, their task eventually became the revelation of
the older tradition. Not surprisingly, they would discover it first in their history, and
finally all around them.
The Black radical tradition that they were to rediscover from a Black historical
experience nearly grounded under the intellectual weight and authority of the official
European version of the past, was to be the foundation upon which they stood. From
this vantage point they could survey the theoretical, ideological, and political instrumentation with which Western radicalism approached the problem of revolutionary
social change. The Black radical tradition cast doubt on the extent to which capitalism
penetrated and re-formed social life and on its ability to create entirely new categories
of human experience stripped bare of the historical consciousness embedded in
culture. It gave them cause to question the authority of a radical intelligentsia drawn
by its own analyses from marginal and ambiguous social strata to construct an
adequate manifestation of proletarian power, And it drew them more and more
toward the actual discourse of revolutionary masses, the impulse to make history in
their own terms. And finally, the Black radical tradition forced them to reevaluate the
nature and historical roles of ideology and consciousness. After all it had been as an
emergent African people and not as slaves that Black men and women had opposed
170

ROOTS OF BLACK R A D I C A L I S M

enslavement. And long before the advent of the "madmen and specialists" (as Wole
Soyinka phrased it), the military dictators and neocolonial petit bourgeoisies who in
our own time have come to dominate Black societies in Africa and the Caribbean, the
Black radical tradition had defined the terms of their destruction: the continuing
development of a collective consciousness informed by the historical struggles for
liberation and motivated by the shared sense of obligation to preserve the collective
being, the ontological totality.

N A T U R E OF T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

171

of too longstanding account. Enmeshed as they were in historical traditions boasting
of, say, Elizabethan and Edwardian eras, Jeffersonianor Jacksonian structures, and SO
on, rather singular and often superficial benchmarks had become the rule for establishing the setting of human activity. Divisions of historical time seemed particularly
easy things to recognize, attribute, distribute, and declare. To such intellects, then, the
twentieth century would seem a text in its own right. In a moment, we shall investigate how poor a preparation this would be for the proper placement of Black revolutionary thinkers.
Finally, of course, there was the overpowering spectacle of European radicalism
and revolution apparently launched by the First World War. No matter their ideological or theoretical legacy, liberal or otherwise, it seemed to some that these events
were bound to the immediate forces that overtook the older capitalist order in the
twentieth century. Moreover, the names of twentieth-century revolutionists-Zapata,
Lenin, Trotsky, Gandhi, Mao, Fidel, Lumumba, Ho Chi Minh, Cabral (and many
others)-represented at the same time, more than Marx and Engels had anticipated in
the nineteenth century, and much less. In any case, it was eminently obvious to them
that Black revolutionary thought found its beginnings here. There was little cause to
look elsewhere. In 1966, Eugene Genovese, the radical historian, neatly asserted all
three propositions in an attack on the idea of a Black radical tradition in America:
American radicals have long been imprisoned by the pernicious notion that the
masses are necessarily both good and revolutionary. . . . This viewpoint now
dominates the black liberation movement, which has been fed for decades by white
radical historians who in this one respect have set the ideological pace for their
liberal colleagues. It has become virtually sacrilege-or at least white chauvinismto suggest that slavery was a social system within which whites and blacks lived in
harmony as well as antagonism, that there is little evidence of massive, organized
opposition to the regime, that the blacks did not establish a revolutionary tradition
of much significance, and that our main problem is to discover the reasons for the
widespread accommodation and, perhaps more important, the long-term effects
both of the accommodation and of that resistance which did occur.'
Thus opposition to slavery was minimal; in "the absence or extreme weakness of such
a tradition," Black nationalism as a movementwas a twentieth-century phenomenon;
and the regard accorded to the revolutionary politics of the Black masses has its
source in "white" radicalism. In the present chapter we will explore in detail this final
thesis: the presumed relationship between Black radicalism and the European radical
movement. It is by far the more important of the three propositions associated with
the misconception of Black radicalism. Nevertheless, some attention to the habits of
historical construction is warranted. It will prove a useful preliminary step, 1believe,
in our effort to recognize the continuity that exists between the Black rebellions of the
previous centuries and the first articulations of a world revolutionary Black theory in
the present century.

176 B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

Capitalism, Imperialism, and
the Black Middle Classes

In chapter 6, because we were rehearsing events that assumed their shapes not less
than one hundred years or so ago, our historical narrative worked, with the Western
convention of centuries as terms of periodization, as a convenient scaffold. However,
social processes, that is historical developments, are neither the products of nor
meaningfully framed by such evenly measured periodicities. The French historian
Fernand Braudel, for one important instance, made this point by extending the
sixteenth century-the historical moment of the dawning of the modern capitalist
world in the West-much beyond its formal claim of one hundred years.2 In a different manner, the Russian revolutionary Leon Trotsky, just as apposite a figure for
our subject here, had earlier confronted such facile assumptions by calling them out
Braudel understood that
as forms of foreshortened chiliasm or millenariani~rn.~
one hundred years was sometimes too short a period to encompass historical processes; Trotsky was amused by the suggestion that human activity might end or begin
with the endings and beginnings of centuries. The point is that the construction of
periods of time is only a sort of catchment for events. Their limited utility, though, is
often abused when we turn from the orderingof things, that is chronological sequencings, to the order of things, that is the arrangement of their significances, meanings,
and relations. Increments of time contoured to abstract measure rarely match the
rhythms of human action. It is important to bear this in mind as we seek to come to
terms with the Black theorists whose writings and thoughts have appeared primarily
in the twentieth century. Their era began with the endings of slavery. They were, it
might be said, the children of the slaves. The phenomenology of slavery formed and
informed them. And in the vortex of its ending, more particularly in the wake of the
social forces that compelled new and different situatings of Blacks and others destined
to serve as labor forces, these theorists discovered their shared social and intellectual
location. The twentieth century was for the most part their biographical station, but
merely one site in the zone of their interrogation.
Still, in the post-slavery world order that was their setting, the Black ideologues
who were to work in the twentieth century could not be other than strangers. This
was to be their lot in whatever part of the Black world they were formed. C. L. R.
James might have spoken for all of them when he wrote of the end of his school days:
"There was no world for which I was fitted least of all the one I was now to enter."4In
Africa and the West Indies, European empires and colonies were either being dramatically reshaped by the dictates of state and commerce or spawned at points formerIy
less accessible to capitalist e~pansion.~
In the United States and the Caribbean again,
Black peoples were no longer conveniently lodged in or organized by slave systems.
The Blacks of the New World could no longer be casually pinioned by the curious as
slaves or-at the margins of such systems-as freemen. And, inevitably, their societies
and subcultures upon which the intelligentsia drew were steadily becoming less au-

FORMATION OF A N INTELLIGENTSIA

177

tochthonous. The social patterns, the habits of thought, language, and custom that
had congealed in the laborers' communities of the Western hemisphere's slave systems, though in many senses fundamentally conservative, were no longer as impervious to the penetrations of Western cultures as they had been in their "native"
circumstance. The masses of Black peoples in the New World and in their ancestral
homelands-as peasants, farmers, peons, agrarian workers, migrant and immigrant
workers, domestics, skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled industrial laborers, and as
labor reserves-now assumed more diverse and diffuse positions in the economic
order. Black labor's new mobility, organization, and adaptability also meant that the
subcultures within which it had been historically enveloped were subject more often
to the intrusions of material and ideographic elements from the agents of the economically determinative social order. Though it might be correctly argued that much
of this penetration was at first incidental, some of it clearly was not. Language, that is
the languages and consciousness of rule and the ruling classes, was an instance of
the latter. These accretions would have profound effects on the ideologues of the
Black world.
Marx and Engels, ifwe recall, had once conceived the notion that the bourgeoisie of
Western Europe would succeed in transforming the whole of the world's nations into
bourgeois societies-loci reduced to social orders of ruling and proletarian classes, as
Marx declared in one of his prefaces to the first volume of Capital. Historically,
however, capitalist expansion had had as its result only the most approximate relation
to Marx's projected social divisions. In those parts of the world where resourceful
indigenous ruling classes were encountered by the empire builders, collisions were
inevitable. Not as inevitable were the results: some native elites were vanquished and
destroyed, others not. Some, having led formidable anti-imperialist defenses, preserved much of their independent cultures, whittling down foreign influences to the
mundane exchanges required by colonial administration. Many, however (and it is
within the British Empire that one finds the best examples), became part of the
apparatus of "indirect rule," a system whose rationale could be so concisely put forth
by one of its mechanics, the British anthropologist, Margery Perham:
The basic difficulty [in carrying out "indirect rule"] is one that will appear in its
different aspects-education, land-tenure, economic production, law-in all our
coming discussions. It is (and here I speak especially of Africa) the great gap
between the culture of rulers and ruled. In administration, reduced to its simplest
terms, it means that for the most part the people do not understand what we want
them to do, or, if they understand, do not want to do it. . . . [W]e endeavor to
instruct the leaders of the people in the objects of our policy, in the hope that they
will, by their natural authority, at once diffuse the instruction and exact the necessary ~bedience.~
For a time the collaboration of native elites was sufficient for the imperialist and
colonial authorities. At the peripheries of the world system where forms of coerced
labor had obtained, peasantries existed in proximity to agrarian workers, unskilled
178 B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

workers to semi-skilled workers; labor reserves were directly and indirectly connected
with those absorbed by the political instruments of authority: armies, militias, native police. By the last decades of the nineteenth century, however, social forces set
loose by imperialist invasions, wars, occupations, administrations, and co-optations,
were maturing.
In the middle tier of these societies rested the native petit bourgeoisie, wedged
between the laboring classes beneath them and the foreign and native operatives of
capital and the officials of the state above. Their social origins were complex and
intertwined. One of their bases was the "mulatto" populations of the former slave
societies and the colonies. This "brown" stratum was frequently the natural issue of
racial systems where privilege of position and education was sometimes bestowed by
white fathers (or mothers). In other instances it was the result of deliberate political
policy. In his massive study, Caste, Class and Race, Oliver Cox stated the general rule:
Where whites are mainly sojourning rulers, their numbers are usually relatively
small. Ordinarily "home" is in Europe or America, and they seldom set their roots
in the area. Here there is little hope of developing a significant white population.
The white man's principal need is not a home but a satisfied and exploitable people
to develop the resources of the country. This ruling class adopts a policy of "cooperation"; and, other things being equal, favors are distributed to the mixedbloods on the basis of their apparent degrees of whiteness among the people of
color. Degrees of color tend to become a determinant of status in a continuous
social-class gradient, with whites at its upper reaches . . . the lighter the complexion, the greater the economic and social opp~rtunities.~
Another basis of the petit bourgeoisie was property. Some Blacks, but certainly with
less frequency than occurred with what French coIonialists termed the petit blancs,
had translated particular skills, traditional positions and knowledge into property
(including slaves during the slave era). With slavery abolished, some of this Blackcontrolled capital was reconverted into professional skills in succeeding generations.*
Frequently, however, the native middle classes had been directly formed as functionaries of the state-civil servants, minor as well as middling-and as agents of
And for sure, there
landed, mercantile, or manufacturing capital (often ab~entee).~
were other paths leading to the privileges of this stratum, some less "legitimate" or
conventional.1°
For colonial administrators, however, the most problematic origins for the native
petit bourgeoisie were the mission schools. From the fifteenth century and before, the
missions had all along served as a part of the rationale for European colonialist and
imperialist aspirations. Still, the correspondence between the ends of missionary
work and the goals of imperialism had never been entirely true. For one, the missionaries themselves, in the case of English imperialism, were often recruited from cobnized peoples: that is, Scots, Irish, and Welsh." Such soldiers for Christ could be often
quite ambivalent about the colonial power. Just as troubling were the potential conflicts between faith and imperial interests. During the construction of slave systems
F O R M A T I O N OF A N INTELLIGENTSIA

179

and afterward, the teaching of the tenets of Christian beliefs had taken as one of its
presumptions the fact of the savage and the savage's or pagan's need. It was thus
axiomatic that the proof of the missionary's success was the creation of civilized
Christians-natives whose familiarity with European (or Euro-American) cultures
and habits were as intimate as their experience with Christ.I2 This meant, though,
that Christian missionaries in some instances felt some ambivalence toward such
colonial policies as "indirect rule," especially "when it [was] held to involve the
strengthening of animism or Islam," as A. Victor Murray put it.I3 Most significant,
however, were the attitudes colonial administrators developed toward the activities of
the missions. The construction of Black Europeans was overly ambitious in their eyes.
In 1938, Arthur Mayhew would advise an Oxford University summer session for
colonial administrators that "Before the Great War education was undoubtedly too
'literary.' " And he then reported, with satisfaction, that "[flrom 1925 onwards great
emphasis was laid on vocational training."14 Forty years later, Penelope Hetherington
would penetrate Mayhew's objections:
In the past missionaries had counted themselves successful if their work in the field
of education had produced black Englishmen, Africans who seemed to have assimilated Western culture. But these missionary-educated Africans were anathema to
many administrators and others. They were "cheeky" and demanded social equality and political rights.15
It had become necessary to rationalize colonial policy and mission education. The
formation of native elites was to be more deliberate. In the beginning there would be
an appropriate contingent of clerks and a limited number of professionals, not nationalistic intellectuals; in the West Indies, such was the educational policy laid down
generally at the end ofthe nineteenth century. In Africa, where populations were large
and mission schools relatively few, the same policy was inaugurated in the years
following World War 1,16 and a common place by the 1930s. In 1933, the Report on
African AfJairs read in part:
Two especially important objects have been kept in view in framing the educational
policy of Nigeria. The first to spread a sound education as widely as possible among
the masses in order to produce, in course of time, a literate population able to
participate intelligently in the economic, social and political development of the
country. The second ideal is to train up as soon as may be a body of men and
women who can perform some of the tasks in Government work and private
enterprise for which at the first impact of western civilization it is necessary to
import Europeans.17
It soon became clear, however, that the colonial governments had moved too late.
"Elite nationalism," one of the first political expressions of the Black petit bourgeoisie,
was already propelling complements of the class into the older, more profound
tradition of radicalism. Elliot Skinner would recall:

180

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

By the 1920s and ~p,os,conflict and incoherence had spread into almost all aspects
of life in colonial Africa. There appeared a group of Africans who had acquired the
cultures of the colonizers and considered themselves to be British, French, and
Portuguese. They had learned to consider Europe as home and had adopted European clothing, speech, and mannerisms.I8
Such was also the case in the Caribbean and in America (where the emergence of a
middle class among Blacks could easily be traced back to the eighteenth century).I9
Even in independent Haiti, where the Black and mulatto revolutionary armies had, by
the beginnings of the nineteenth century, broken down into racial and class factions, a
petit bourgeois nationalism found expression. The sugar-export sector of the Haitian
economy had been destroyed during the revolutionary wars and subsequently was
unable to compete with Cuban and Indian exports in the world system. And though a
series of political eruptions from below had divided the land between large landowners (Black and mulatto) and peasants, the majority of the peasants were landless
and frequently rebellious. Commercial pursuits and control of the administration of
the state had increasingly become the arenas contended for by the Black and mulatto
groups within the ruling class. But in this conflict, Alex Dupuy asserts, "the largely
landowning black faction and its allies, frustrated by the mulattoes in their attempt to
control the state, had recourse to a noiriste or black nationalist ideology, claiming to
be the sole representatives of the people because of their common skin c o l o ~ r . " ~ ~
Inevitably, during the second half of the century, a radical Black ideology was articulated by renegades among the Black petit bourgeois intelligentsia. Eventually it was to
mature in the work of Jean Price-Mars, Georges Sylvain, and Carlos Deambrosis
Martins.*]In every sector of the Black world, the dialectic of exploitation would shake
an increasing number to their very roots. And in time, as the fractures and contradictions of Western domination became more compelling, their presence and their
purpose would become electrifyingly clear.

Western Civilization and the
Renegade Black Intelligentsia

In the Anglophone, Francophone, and Latin territories of both hemispheres, the
Black "middle classes" had become broadly identified by culture and language, that is,
their abilities to absorb the cultures of their ruling classes and the reading and
speaking of European tongues. Deracination, social, and cultural alienation had become the measures of their "civility," loyalty, and usefulness. And of course they
shared with the mass of Blacks the knowledge that these veneers were the historical
artifices of the structuring of authority, caste, race, and class, and that their particular
adaptiveness was the mark of privilege and status. As intermediaries between Black
labor and the world system in Africa, the Caribbean and North America, as mediators
between Black workers and the social tapestry woven by capitalist-determined forms

FORMATION OF A N INTELLIGENTSIA

181

of production, their skills were functional and the naturalness with which they obtained them only apparently so. In the West Indies as well as Africa, systems of
colonial education tutored these complements of irn~erialism.~~
In North America in
the decades following the Civil War, similar apparatuses were to be found in the
southern states. Of his sector of the African diaspora, James has said:
In every West Indian island, in those days from nineteen hundred for the first
twenty or thirty years, there was always a secondary school. Always one. . . . In the
school I went to there were nine masters, eight of them were either from Oxford or
Cambridge, and the one who wasn't was a drawing master. Well, you needn't go to
Oxford or Cambridge to be a drawing master.23
Still, for these Black middle strata just as it was the case for the vast majority of Blacks,
the dominant class and whites in general were not intimates of any immediate sort. In
the Caribbean and Africa for the most part, whites were of a relatively small number.
In Latin and North America, where European populations were statistically dominant, for most Blacks the whites were existentially a distant, fearful, and oppressive
presence. Whites marked the landscape, and in a way, the boundaries of Black life,
their lives, their habits, their very appearance the testament and detail of a cruel and
unyielding order of social and spiritual regulation. For the radical Black ideologuesalmost entirely circumscribed by native petit bourgeoisies-it was not only inevitable
but also imperative that they would first acquire the stance of internal aliens. Those of
special interest to us here bear this out.
From Trinidad came George Padmore, C. L. R. James, Eric Williams, and Oliver C.
Cox. Padmore (born Malcolm Ivan Meredith Nurse) and James were the sons of
school headmaster^.^^ Eric Williams, one of their most illustrious if prodigal students,
was a product of the same Black petit bourgeoisie-at a somewhat lesser rank.25
Oliver Cromwell Cox, as his name suggests, was the son of middle strata parents who
it appears had taken the authority of their colonial "betters" at its
In North
America, W. E. B. Du Bois was reared by the "black Burghardts" amidst the more
affluent white children of Great Barrington, Massachusetts. As he recalled his childhood in one ofhis autobiographies, Darkwater, it was some time before he discovered
that he was "colored:' and by then he had already absorbed the rather disdainful
attitudes of his peers toward the few southern European immigrant families that
made their appearance in Great B a r r i n g t ~ nOnly
. ~ ~ Richard Wright, among the radical Black thinkers upon whom we shall lay emphasis, came from the Black substratum. But even here, the son of a sometime itinerant Mississippi farmer and
general laborer was also, on his mother's side, the heir of a family with middle strata
p r e t e n s i ~ n sAgain,
. ~ ~ with the exception of Wright, they had all begun their adult lives
destined for professional careers. Their childhoods had born the marks peculiar to
the Black middle strata-the presumption that being Black was incidental to their
expected social stations. They were launched into maturity, as Wright would declare
for himself during one of his moments of acute alienation, as representatives of "the

182 B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

West."29Eventually this would prove to be the source of their contradictory compulsions, their strengths, and their weaknesses.
Among the vitalizing tools of the radical intelligentsia, of course the most crucial
was words. Words were their means of placement and signification, the implements
for discovery and revelation. With words they might and did construct new meanings,
new alternatives, new realities for themselves and others. But language, that is Western
culture, was more than some recumbent artifact to be used or not as the intelligentsia
saw fit. Its place in their lives had been established long before they found the means of
mastering it. Indeed, they were themselves in part defined by those languages of rule
and commerce. In Frantz Fanon's poetic description, they were Black skins under
white masks. James has quite effectively captured this contradiction:
[Aime] Cesaire and I were talking one day, and I asked him: "Where do you come
from?" He said, "Well I grew up in Martinique [and went to] the Victor Schoelscher
school." . . . So I said: "What did you do there?" He told me: "Latin and Greek and
French literature." And I said: "What next?" He said, "I went to France, and I went
to the Ecole Normale Superiore." I said, "Yes I know that school. It is famous for
producing scholars and Communists." (Cesaire was one of the first in each department: he was one of the finest scholars and he was a notable Communist.) And I
said: "What did you do there?" And he said: "Latin and Greek and French literature.'' And then I said: "Where did you go from there?" And he said: "I went to the
Sorbonne." And I said, "I suppose you did there Latin and Greek and French
Literature?" And he said: "Exactly." He said, "But there is one thing more." And I
asked: "What is that?" He said, "I went back to teach in Martinique, and I went to
the Victor Schoelscher school, and there I taught Latin and Greek and French
literature." So when Cesaire wrote his tremendous attack upon Western civilization,
In Return to My Native Land, and said that Negritude was a statement for some
concepts of civilization which the Black people had and which would be important
in any development of civilization away from capitalist society, he was able to make
this ferocious attack upon Western civilization because he knew it inside out. . . .He
had spent some twenty years studying it.30
As it had been for Cesaire, so it was for all of them. They would all pass through the
prepossessing claims of bourgeois ideology for Western cultural superiority with
their only modestly disguised racialism. But eventually they would emerge convinced
that a larger and different achievement was required. At first they would believe that
the answer lay in the vision of class struggle, the war between brothers, as Julius
Nyerere would later characterize Marxist socialist theory." That conception, too,
would prove to be insufficient. As Cox would write in his own summary considerations of Marx and Engels, their conceptualization of capitalism was only a partial
realization of the historical forces that had created the Black ideologues and that they
sought to comprehend and defeat.32Ineluctably, as we shall see, the events that did
most to shape their era-the crises of world capitalism, the destructive dialectic of

F O R M A T I O N O F A N INTELLIGENTSIA

183

imperialism, and the historical and ideological revelations of the naivety of Western
socialism-drove them into a deeper consciousness. Appropriately, what Padmore
found it necessary to do in the rnid-l93os, Wright in the early i94os, and James at the
end of that decade, was later echoed by Cesaire's declaration in 1956:
What I demand of Marxism and Communism is that they serve the black peoples,
not that the black peoples serve Marxism and Communism. Philosophies and
movements must serve the people, not the people the doctrine and the movement. . . . A doctrine is of value only if it is conceived by us and for us, and revised
through us. . . . We consider it our duty to make common cause with all who
cherish truth and justice, in order to form organizations able to support effectively
the black peoples in their present and future struggle-their struggle for justice, for
culture, for dignity, for liberty. . . . Because of this, please accept my resignation
from the Party.33
From such moments as these, each in his own time, turned his face to the historical
tradition of Black liberation and became Black radicals. They began the realization of
their history and their theoretical task. We shall now consider how this came about
and what were its several theoretical and ideological significations. We shall proceed
historically, adhering as closely as it is possible to the processes that encompassed
scholarship, practice, and consciousness, and eventually spanned historiography and
the development of a theory of Black struggle. As we shall discover, the contributions
of these intellects are enormous, their productivity massive. For these reasons, necessarily we shall explore only a portion of their work. Hopefully our review will touch
on the more important parts. Much, however, will remain still to be said, understood,
and discussed. Theirs is a living legacy. But always we must keep in mind that their
brilliance was also derivative. The truer genius was in the midst of the people of
whom they wrote. There the struggle was more than words or ideas but life itself.

184 B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

with his detractors. The opposition to Du Bois was grounded on deeper reservations:
the recognition that his work had origins independent of the impulses of Western
liberal and radical thought. Thus, when his contribution to the American historical
tradition should have been celebrated by its historians and scholars, the reaction of
the academy was often vilification and neglect. And when he should have been
recognized as one of the deans of radical historiography-in his seventh decade he
became one of the two most sophisticated Marxist theorists in America2-the orthodox and "authorized" intellectuals accused him of Marxian heresies, racial chauvinism, and flawed conceptualization. There were, however, much more historic reasons
for the intolerance found toward Du Bois's works. These reasons can only be identified and understood by a review and analysis of the historical, intellectual, and
ideological contexts from which they arose.
It is by now generally understood that the formation of nation-states and political
reigns precipitate the development of founding myths-myths of origin, in the language of anthropologist^.^ Though the process may have been obscured by time in
more distant eras, the emergences of the bourgeoisies of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries made it explicit. Their use of print and press, their appeals to and
seductions of the classes they wished to dominate, made the fabrication of national
myths quite evident. These myths were to be recognized in the official instruments of
class hegemony: national creeds, social ideologies, philosophical tenets, constitutions,
and the like, their function was to legitimate the social orders that had come into
being. These myths made the new order a necessary one, an inevitable and benevolent
event. They indicated to the national populace that the strains of historical novelty,
the insecurities and anxieties accompanying the break with established forms were
temporary, that change was natural, organic, and right. Founding myths were substituted for history, providing the appearance of historical narrative to what was in
actuality part fact and part class-serving rationales. Endlessly elaborated, these myths
were produced by ideologues who identified with the dominant creed and depended
upon those classes in the society that possessed power and the capacities to extend
social pri~ilege.~
The formation of the American state provided no exception. The American Constitution, the Declaration of Independence, the considerations raised in the Federalist
Papers were all expressions of the interests and creed of the American bourgeoi~ie.~
Soon they were to be augmented by the myths of Frontier, the paternal Plantation, the
competitive capitalism of the Yankee, the courage of the Plainsman, and later supplemented by the tragedy of the War between the States, the Rugged Individual, the
excitement of the American Industrial Revolution, the generosity of the Melting Pot.
Such were the romantic fictions that came to constitute the social ideology of the
nation's bo~rgeoisie.~
There was, though, an even older mythology, one that preceded
the development of an American bourgeoisie with its nationalist sentiments and war
of independence. Colonialism in America had required a different rationale: the
Savage. Conveniently, as we have seen in the previous chapter, English colonialism
had had available to it the savagery of the Irish to draw upon. The notion had traveled
186

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

well. When the need was for labor, the Irish, the poor of the metropole's cities, the
African and the native American were comfortably herded together under the notion
of savagery. When the issue had been the expropriation of the lands of the natives,
there was little cause to respect the claims of savages or to comprehend their resistance as anything more than savagery.' Indeed, colonial thought expected quite
the opposite. The colonists were the "advanced civilization." Such societies proved
their historical significance by the destruction or domination of savage and backward peoples.
Eventually, of course, the ideologies of the pre-bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie had
fused. As the systems of manufacturing, plantation slavery, and farming had closed
together into an integrated national economy sharing the exploitation of land, labor,
and natural resources, the social ideology and historical consciousness of the ruling
classes acquired two domestic enemies, the Indian and the Negro. In the early nineteenth century, the destruction of the native savage and the domination of the imported one became dual proofs of the superiority of the new nation. And once the
native American peoples became incapable of resistance, they were further transformed and trivialized, becoming the romantic residue of an archaic past, living
museum piece^.^ For the Negro, however, it was a different story.
Throughout much of the nineteenth century, the African remained a substantial
labor force for the further development of the country. As a consequence, the political, social, and cultural significanceof the African was more enduring. This meant, as
Craven suggests in the following example from seventeenth-century Virginia, that the
efforts taken to resolve the opposition of the Black in American thought were so often
deliberate and constant that they remained obvious and conscious:
The crude humor with which shipmasters or purchasers drew upon ancient history or mythology for the names of Caesar, Hannibal, Nero, Jupiter, Pluto, or
Minerva; the Primus and Secundus who headed one list; and the use more than
once of Ape or Monkey for a name records principally an all-too-prevalent attitude
of the white toward the black.9
During the era that followed, when manufacturing became the most advanced form
of production and democratic institutions the most significant political creed, the
African was represented as chattel in their economic image, as slaves in their political and social image, as brutish and therefore inaccessible to further development,
and finally as Negro, that is without history. And later, during the industrialization
of the country's economy, when individuality and manipulative acumen were at a
premium, the Black was a pathetic sharecropper, unskilled and unambitious-the
"happy darkies" for whom the society possessed a paternalistic obligation. Finally, in
our own time, with the development of corporate structures and the myth of the
intensively rationalized and rational society, Blacks became the irrational, the violent,
criminal, caged beast. The cage was civilization and Western culture, obviously available to Blacks but inexplicably beyond their grasp.1°
Black historiography developed in opposition to this cloned thought and senH I S T O R I O G R A P H Y A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

187

sibility in American consciousness. This was not the intention. Nor, in its beginnings,
did it seem likely, since the first efforts at writing the history of the race had occurred
some decades after the ending of the ennobling literature that had accompanied the
abolition movement. With the Emancipation signed, there was no longer a demand
for historical excursions into the Negro's African past to substantiate their humanity
and its irresistible degradation by slavery. The noble savage had ceased to have a
function. But reconstruction had rekindled the ideological attack on Black people.
Sixty years after the assault had been renewed, Du Bois would unhesitantly designate
its source:
The real frontal attack on Reconstruction, as interpreted by the leaders of national
thought in 1870 and for some time thereafter, came from the universities and
particularly from Columbia and Johns Hopkins.
The movement began with Columbia University and with the advent of John W.
Burgess of Tennessee and William A. Dunning of New Jersey as professors of
political science and history.l'
Their collective judgment of Black people, their "silence and contempt" as Du Bois
characterized it, became American history. And since men such as these were also
intimately involved in the construction of the nation's agenda for the academic study
of its political processes and structures, their shared assessment of Blacks was also a
prescription:
In order to paint the South as a martyr to inescapable fate, to make the North the
magnanimous emancipator, and to ridicule the Negro as the impossible joke in the
whole development, we have in fifty years, by libel, innuendo and silence, so
completely misstated and obliterated the history of the Negro in America and his
relation to its work and government that today it is almost unknown. . . . It is not
only part foundation of our present lawlessness and loss of democratic ideals it has,
more than that, led the world to embrace and worship the color bar as social
salvation and it is helping to range mankind in ranks of mutual hatred and contempt, at the summons of a cheap and false myth.12
The stakes had been high during the decades of the post bellum. As Thomas
Rainboro had seen it in England's convulsive seventeenth century, the question posed
in the years following the American Civil War was "Either poverty must use democracy to destroy the power of property, or property in fear of poverty will destroy
dem~cracy."'~
As ideologues for both victorious northern industrial capital and a
now chastened southern agrarian capital, the white intelligentsia-academician and
otherwise-rewove social and historical legends that accommodated the exploitative
projects of those ruling classes. The political consciousness of Black labor, white
labor, and immigrant labor were to be smothered by the social discipline implicit in
the legends. Complemented by the terror of state militias, company police, and
security agents, the persistent threats of immigration controls, the swelling ranks of
reserve labor, racialism was reattired so that it might once again take its place among
188 B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

the inventory of labor disciplines. Driven by the necessity to respond quickly to the
rush of working-class mobilizations following the war, capital and its ideologues had
not dallied:
In the year 1877, the signals were given for the rest of the century: the black would
be put back; the strikes of white workers would not be tolerated; the industrial and
political elites of North and South would take hold of the country and organize the
greatest march of economic growth in human history. They would do it with the
aid of, and at the expense of, black labor, white labor, Chinese labor, European
immigrant labor, female labor, rewarding them differently by race, sex, national
origin, and social class, in such a way as to create separate levels of oppression-a
skillful1terracing to stabilize the pyramid of wealth.14
This new repression of Black labor was the immediate cause and the circumstance of
the profusion of protest materials produced by the Black intelligentsia in the last
decades of the nineteenth century. And Black history was their desperate invention.
Stunned by the suddenness of the reversal of both their own fortunes and those of
the Black masses, the most representative spokesmen of the Black petit bourgeoisie
responded with the journalistic and literary eloquence that they believed had so well
served them and the slaves in previous eras. While the Black masses organizedsometimes secretly but increasingly openly, to protect their political rights, and then
when they were lost, in order to emigrate to the American hinterlands or to Liberiathe Black intelligentsia remained wedded to the tactics of supplication. These representative colored men, as Painter has characterized them,I5 insisted on the identity
they presumed to share with their white, class counterparts. As the editor of a Black
newspaper in San Francisco had declared in 1862, as far as he could see Black Americans were "moved by the same impulses, guided by the same motives, and [had] the
same Yankee-like go-aheadativeness of the white Americans."I6 Like many others of
his station, he begged his audience's indulgence for being Black and thus obscuring
his truer colors. Still it was a most disheartening period for many of them. They
worked hard in their newspapers, pamphlets, their public lectures and Congressional
appearances at establishing their Americanism, only to be rebuffed out ofhand by the
nation's dominant ideolog~es.'~
Inevitably, it had occurred to some members of the Black petit bourgeoisie that
their disadvantage in the ideological fray lay in part with their failure to engage the
American legend. In the midst of a country whose ideationists were desperately
attempting to forge a historically grounded national identity, their lot was reduced to
an identification with the horror with which slavery had been concluded. In an
America that was now being reconstituted by its ideologues on the mantle of a
Manifest Destiny presumably inherited from its European origins,18the Black intelligentsia had a historical basis that was too shallow to support their demand to be
included in the nation's destinies. Legend as history denied to them that right and, as
well, their ~apabilities.'~
The aspirations of the Black middle class required a history
that would, at once, absolve their guilt by association with the catastrophic ending of
H I S T O R I O G R A P H Y A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

189

slavery; lend historical weight to the dignity they claimed as a class; and suggest their
potential as participants in the country's future. They required a Black historiography
that would challenge their exclusion from the nation's racial parochialisms while
settling for those very values. When their historiography did begin, it was not so
much a bold initiative against the certainties of nationalist and racialist histories as a
plea for sympathy.
Black history thus began in the shadow of the national myths and as their dialectical negation. Consequently, it contained its own contradictions (e.g., the trivialization of social action) while enveloping those that occurred within the dominant
American history. Generations later it would give rise to a more critical and truer
opposition, but for the time being, it was to match American history in the coin of the
realm; monument for monument, civilization for civilization, great man for great
man. George Washington Williams, the first of the major Afro-American historians,
left no doubt about these concerns.20In 1882, Williams had published his mammoth
classic, A History of the Negro Race in America from 1619 to 1880; it consisted of two
volumes totalling almost 1,100 pages. One may have already surmised that despite his
titular boundaries, Williams had not confined himself to the events that began in the
seventeenth century. Indeed, like many of his contemporary sp0kesmen,2~he had
found it appropriate to begin his search into the past by reviewing the role of Africans
in the pre-Christian eras when "Western civilization," owing its immediate stimulus
to Egyptian culture, had been centered around the Mediterranean. The contrast
between these eras, the apogee in Williams's mind of African development, and the
centuries of Negro enslavement that followed two millennia later, provided him with
the opportunity to enunciate his beliefs:
His [the Negro's] position, it is true, in all history up to the present day, has been
accidental, incidental and collateral. . . . His brightest days were when history was
an infant; and since he early turned from God, he has found the cold face of hate
and the hurtful hand of the Caucasian against him. The Negro type is the result of
degradation. It is nothing more than the lowest strata of the African race. . . . His
blood infected with the poison of his low habitation, his body shrivelled by disease,
his intellect veiled in pagan superstitions, the noblest yearnings of his soul strangled at birth by the savage passions of a nature abandoned to sensuality,-the poor
Negro of Africa deserves more our pity than our contempt.22
The confusion in Williams's thought was real. He wrote from both a Puritanical
perspective with its echoes of God's election, but was, as well, mindful of the racialist
nature of his people's degradation and oppression. But in the latter, he was again perversely diverted since his resolve to write a "true history of the Black man" stemmed
from his wish to "incite the latter to greater effort in the struggle of citizenship and
manhood." While attacking the most extreme ideological forms that hatred of Blacks
had assumed ("sons of Ham,'' the "curse of Canaan") and while denouncing the
institution of slavery, he still demonstrated a certain ambivalence. Tacit but un-

I90 B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

spoken, of course, was the notion that only a Black elite could realize the task of Negro
res~rrection.~~
By the last decades of the nineteenth century, the ideological construction of the
Black petit bourgeoisie had achieved its maturity. The tendency of the Black intelligentsia toward an elitist consciousness of race-a synthesis of Eurocentric racism and
the preoccupation with imperial political forms-had achieved its broadest and most
articulate expression. The social, and concomitant psychological and intellectual processes of the formation of a Black middle class begun in the eighteenth century had,
No longer retarded by
by then, obtained an extensive and objective c~nfiguration.~~
the political and economic structure of slavery and its hegemonic envelopments,
freed from the moral compulsion of social identification with the Black peasantry and
peons by the slaves' counterfeit freedom,25the ambitions of the Black petit bourgeoisie
found realization in institutions consciously designed by themselves and sponsors for
class's maintenance and a ~ g m e n t a t i o n With
. ~ ~ their position as a broker stratum
seemingly secured from above by a ruling class that proffered them increments of
privilege while ruthlessly repressing mass Black mobili~ation,~~
the ideological restraint that had been so much a part of the character of the class's earlier generations
became less evident. The Black petit bourgeoisie could now indulge in the delusion of
being capable of challenging the capitalist world system on what they took to be its
own terms: race
The political ideology that emerged from their "Negro"
universities and colleges, the pulpits above their denominationally stratified congregations, their professional associations, their creative literature, and their histo,~~
and paternalistic.
riography was persistently mystically c h a ~ v i n i s t authoritarian,
From the post-Reconstruction on into the next century, the logic of the formation of
the Black petit bourgeoisie and its intelligentsia was building to these conclusions. As
Jeremiah Moses argues:
It was becoming apparent to the post-bellum generation of black leaders that
individual accomplishments offered little pro'tection from the threats and abuses of
the caste-like American system. The middle class Negroes would remain victims of
prejudice, so long as the masses remained untutored, impoverished, and demoralized. The goal of uplifting the freedmen was similar to the goal of uplifting Africa,
and was to be carried on for the same purposes as the old antebellum African
civilizationism. The building of an Afro-American culture would demonstrate to
all the world that blacks were able and willing to make a contribution to American
life, and were, therefore, fit to be United States citizens. As the masses were elevated, the bourgeoisie would rise corre~pondingly.~~
These were the purposes that inspired Bishop David A. Payne of the African Methodist Episcopal Church (AME) to form the Bethel Literary and Historical Association in
1881,~'which in 1897 was incorporated into the American Negro Academy by its
founder, the Black Presbyterian Cambridge-trained missionary, Alexander Crummell;32which complemented the studied feminism of the National Association of

H I S T O R I O G R A P H Y A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

191

Colored Women (formerly the National Federation of Afro-American Women) catalyzed into being by Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin, Mary Church Terrell, Ida B. Wells,
Margaret Murray Washington and others in 1895;~~
and provided a specific martial
character to some Negro colleges.34Inevitably, spokesmen were driven to cosmetic
excess: William Ferris declared that he preferred "Negrosaxon" to Negro, while Boston's mulatto elite appropriated "Afro-American" to itself, and earlier, William C. Nell
had employed "Black sax on^,"'^ but Crummell saw no need for equivocation. For
him, the identity, function, and nature of their class were obvious:

Who are to be the agents to raise and elevate this people to a higher plane of beings?
The answer will at once flash upon your intelligence. It is to be affected (sic) by the
scholars and philanthropists which come forth in these days from the schools. They
are to be the scholars; for to transform, stimulate and uplift a people is a work of
intelligence. It is a work which demands the clear induction of historic facts and
their application to new circumstances,-a work which will require the most skillful resources and the wise practicality of superior men.36
According to W. J. Moses, it was Crummell who initiated the synthesis of his class's
interests into a coherent ideology.37But it was others, I would suggest, like George W.
Williams and Carter G. Woodson who codified it into a historiographic expression
negating the national legend.38Still, what they achieved was but a fragile construction, its integrity subject to challenge whenever capitalist indulgence, the foundation
upon which it rested, might dissipate or be withdrawn. Mercifully, perhaps, it was
also true that the possibility of this occurring was beyond the comprehension of most
of them. Neither Social Darwinism nor their comfortable gospels suggested anything
but the most temporary diversions as possible. When the crisis did come and Black
people mobilized to struggle against it, the Black petit bourgeoisie was again largely
unprepared to abandon their illusory partnership with power. Du Bois, like his
predecessors and contemporaries, William Brown, Carter Woodson, Bishop Henry
Turner, George Williams, and the West Indian-born Edward Wilmot B l ~ d e nhad
,~~
been deeply implicated in the "race uplift" historiographic tradition.
Du Bois was among the forty black intellectuals enlisted in the American Negro
Academy of which Crummell was the first president. In the Academy's Occasional
Papers, Du Bois published his Crummellian essay, "The Conservation of Races,"
showing that he was hardly out of step with the conservative Crummell during his
years with the American Negro Academy. . . . The classical black nationalist traits of
mysticism, authoritarianism, civilizationism and collectivism were strong elements
in "The Conservation of Races." Du Bois called upon the Academy to exercise a
firm leadership and to become "the epitome and expression of the intellect of the
black-blooded people of America." The black leaders were not to organize for such
mundane purposes as the stealing of political spoils, nor "merely to protest and
pass resolutions." Black leadership should be united in its efforts to improve the
black masses, to fight against loafing, gambling, crime, and prostitution . . . to
192 BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

strive for "the rearing of a race ideal in America and Africa, to the glory of God and
the uplifting of the Negro people."40
In the earliest phase of his career, under the direct influence of Crummell, the Academy, and the omnipresent organizational politics of Booker T. Washington, Du Bois
had found the notion of an elite, a Talented Tenth, appealing:
The Negro race, like all races, is going to be saved by its exceptional men. The
problem of education, then, among Negroes must first of all deal with the Talented
Tenth; it is the problem of developing the Best of this race that they may guide
the Mass away from the contamination and death of the Worst, in their own and
other races.41
At the time he saw the difference between his design and that of Washington as quite
significant. In time, he knew better. In his last autobiography, written in the "last
decades of his 95 years," he made it clear that in the intervening years he had come to
recognize that the differences between them were insignificant when compared to
what they did not comprehend. Their dispute was not over ideology but power:
I believed in the higher education of a Talented Tenth who through their knowledge of modern culture could guide the American Negro into a higher civilization.
I knew that without this the Negro would have to accept white leadership, and that
such leadership could not always be trusted. . . . Mr. Washington, on the other
hand, believed that the Negro as an efficient worker could gain wealth and that
eventually through his ownership of capital he would be able to achieve a recognized place in American culture. . . . [H]e proposed to put the emphasis at present upon training in the skilled trades and encouragement in industry and common Iabor.
These two theories of Negro progress were not absolutely contradictory. Neither
I nor Booker Washington understood the nature of capitalistic exploitation of
labor, and the necessity of a direct attack on the principle of exploitation as the
beginning of labor uplift.42
What Du Bois did resent, more and more, was the power that enveloped Washington
and circulated through his fingers:
Not only did presidents of the United States consult Booker T. Washington, but
governors and congressmen; philanthropists conferred with him, scholars wrote to
him. Tuskegee became a vast information bureau and center of advice. . . . After a
time almost no Negro institution could collect funds without the recommendation
or acquiescence of Mr. Washington. Few political appointments of Negroes were
made anywhere in the United States without his consent. Even the careers of rising
young colored men were very often determined by his advice and certainly his
opposition was fatal. . . .
Moreover, it must not be forgotten that his Tuskegee Machine was not solely the
idea and activity of black folk at Tuskegee. It was largely encouraged and given
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

193

financial aid through certain white groups and individuals in the North. This
Northern group had clear objectives. They were capitalists and employers of labor. . . . These Negroes were not to be encouraged as voters in the new democracy,
nor were they to be left at the mercy of the reactionary South. They were good
laborers and they could be made of tremendous profit to the North. They could
become a strong labor force and properly guided they would restrain the unbridled
demands of white labor, born of the Northern labor unions and now spreading to
the South and encouraged by European socialism.43
It was not entirely the case, as Lawrence Reddick suggested in 1937,~~
that the "uplift"
tradition from which Du Bois would eventually emerge possessed a deeply ingrained
naivete. It would appear that the major part of its obtuseness resulted from the masks
of deception behind which the struggle over power within the Black petit bourgeoisie
was taking place. It was not merely an etiquette of intra-class divisions that made
deception necessary.45The material stakes were high: in 1903, for example, Andrew
Carnegie had extended a gift of $6oo,ooo to T ~ s k e g e eMost
. ~ ~ significantly, however,
the Black petit bourgeoisie was bound by a class strategy that narrowed their political
range: the protests of the masses of Blacks could not be allowed to move beyond a
diffuse state but at the same time must give the appearance of racial solidarity. The
premium for which Du Bois challenged Washington was power not leadership. It was,
however, the nature and setting of this struggle that propelled Du Bois beyond the
accepted parameters of intra-class conflict.
The radicalization of Du Bois took place during a historical period characterized
by a reintensification of the suppression of Blacks in the United States and the
subsequent massive Black response. In the South and the Midwest, the Populist
movement of the 1880s and 1890%spurred by the conversion crisis ofworld capitalism
and with its third-party aspirations built around an alliance between white and Black
farmerslpeasants and organized labor, had once again mobilized the Black masses.47
Legal and illegal violence, election corruption, and a renewed emphasis on white
supremacy were the combined responses of the ruling classes, industrial and planter,
which orchestrated state and federal power and the instruments of propaganda.@
Electoral restrictions stripping poor Blacks and whites from the vote were enacted in
several states; lynchings accelerated (with the number of Black victims surpassing that
of whites in 1889); and the Populist movement was transformed into a shambles by
the unleashing of racial maneuvers.49The most dramatic response of the Black masses
was migration. And when the cycle of drought, then heavy rains and the boll weevil
vermin decimated cotton production in the years of 1915 and 1916 was combined with
war industry and the cessation of European immigration, the migration of the Black
masses became the Great Migration:
[Elarly migrations were dwarfed by the surge of black people northward after 1900,
and especially after 1910. According to various contemporaneous estimates, between 1890 and 1910 around 200,000 black Southerners fled to the North; and
between 1910 and 1920 another 300,ooo to i,ooo,ooo followed. The Department of
194

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

Labor reported that in eighteen months of 1916-17 the migration was variously
estimated at 200,000 to 700,ooo.~~
A Black presence in the northern industrial sectors of the country became a new fact
of the American e ~ p e r i e n c e . ~ ~
The most important consequence of these mass mobilizations, that is both the
short-lived alliance with the agrarian rebellion of Populism and the urban migration,
was that they amounted to a visible renunciation of the Black petit bourgeoisie's
"leadership" by the Black peasantry. Hundreds of thousands of Blacks demonstrated
that they were no longer willing to tolerate the social and economic insecurities of
living in the rural South, to work in semi-slaveryas the nation's cheapest labor, and to
perish under the dual oppressions of the racist patronage of the white southern ruling
class and the class opportunism of an ambitious and presumptuous Black petit
bourgeoisie. It is not surprising, then, that in these circumstances some members of
the Black middle class should discover in this an occasion for renouncing those
among them who dominated their class's political and historical vision. In the same
act, these renegades were drawn into the orbit of the masses of Blacks and the radical
tradition. William Monroe Trotter, Du Bois's Harvard classmate, preceded him in this
realization, and within the nexus of the Niagara Movement, begun in 1905, certainly
disciplined Du Bois in this new militancy. Trotter, more than any other single individual, was responsible for transforming Du Bois from a cautious critic to a militant
It was Du Bois, however, who by temperament, training, and experience
would be capable of bringing this revolt to fruition; as his work certifies, it was to
build in his intellect slowly, ineluctably. The evidence of his development was to be
apparent from his evocation of the militancy of John Browns53 published in 1909;
through his short assay with the socialist movement,54his analysis of the imperialist
basis of the Great War;55his reactions to Bolshevik Russia;56and the frustrations and
compromises suffered as a race advocate operating in the national and international
arenas of "bourgeois democratic politics" responsive to only one racial consciousness: white superiority5' By the time the most profound crisis in the history of world
capitalism occurred, Du Bois was consciously divorced from the legend as well as its
permutations.

Du Bois and the Reconstructionof
History and American Political Thought

In 1935, Du Bois published his third historical work on the economic forces and
ideological dynamics that gave nineteenth-century America its character. UnIike the
two previous studies, The Suppression of the African Slave-Trade and John Brown,
which were more conventional in narrative and analysis, Black Reconstruction in
America possessed a theory of history-a theory based on a foundation of economic
analysis and class struggle.58It was not simply a historical work, but history subjected
to theory. The emphasis was on the relations of things.
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

19s

Du Bois, however, had not neglected the play of history, its scenario. He had
intended to-and did-trace the critical phenomenology of the American Civil War
and its aftermath, the Reconstruction. From his research there emerged a fundamentally revised construction of those periods that stood as a critique of American
historiography with its racial biases, domineering regionalisms, and distorting philosophical commitments. Methodologically, moreover, Black Reconstruction possessed
a rigor consciously designed to match and supersede Ulrich B. Phillips's earlier "classic" work on slavery, American Negro Slavery. Du Bois, in his attempt to authoritatively identify what he took to be the truer character of the Reconstruction era, seems
to have realized the necessity of returning to the experience and training in historical
research and writing he had gathered at Harvard University and the University of
Berlin in the late nineteenth century but had eschewed in John Brown. His radical,
and radically different interpretation of the war and its aftermath would conform
formally to the methodological canons of historiography so that he might subvert the
substance of that tradition.
Black Reconstruction, however, was more the result of another purpose, a concern
that was quite different from the task of historical revision. Du Bois committed
himself to the development of a theory of history, which by its emphasis on mass
action was both a critique of the ideologies of American socialist movements and a
revision of Marx's theory of revolution and class struggle. From the integument
of America's Civil War and the Reconstruction, Du Bois attempted to identify the
unique character of mass praxis, class consciousness, ideology, and contradiction as
they had occurred in the dialectics of American social and historical developments. In
so doing, he was going beyond the argument of American "exceptionalism" that had
persisted in the ideology of the American Marxist Left.5yHe was seeking to identify
historically and analytically the processes that during the Depression years had given
American social dynamics their character and potentialities.
Ultimately, Black Reconstruction was a political work. In the confrontation with the
nationalist and reactionary American intelligentsia at the level of historiography, in
the confrontation with the political Left in terms of the theory of capitalism and the
ideology of emergent socialism, Du Bois presumed to alert and instruct revolutionary
Black leadership.
With regard to these several concerns, he had made his position quite clear in
1933-a period coincident with the writing of Black Reconstruction-in a remarkable
lecture delivered before the participants of a Rosenwald Fund-sponsored conference
at Howard University. Addressing himself to the role played by the American intellectual elite, Du Bois had argued:
If we give Mr. Roosevelt the right to meddle with the dollar, if we give Herr Hitler
the right to expel the Jew, if we give to Mussolini the right to think for Italians, we
do this because we know nothing ourselves. We are as a nation ignorant of the
function and meaning of money, and we are looking around helplessly to see if
anybody else knows.
196

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

This is not, as some assume, the failure of democracy-it is the failure of education, of justice and of truth. We have lied so long about money and business, we do
not know now where truth is.60
Unequivocally, Du Bois was associating the failure of the American nation to achieve
an effective policy in the midst of the Depression with "the fact that it has no
intelligent democracy. . . I' This, he believed, was a consequence of the ideological
deceptions and misconceptions that characterized liberal American thought. Turning
to the American Left, Du Bois was no less critical. Of the American Communist Party
(CPUSA),
DUBois declared:
The task that I have recently been setting myself is to blunt the wedge the Communist party is driving into our group . . . and I do this, not because of any enmity or
fear or essential disagreement with the Communists. If I were in Russia, I should be
an enthusiastic Communist. If the Communist party in the United States had the
leadership and knowledge which our situation calls for, I certainly should join it;
but it is today ignorant of fact and history and the American scene and is trying to
over-emphasize the truth that the natural leaders of the colored people, the educated and trained classes have had goals and interests different from the mass of
Negroes.
There is a partial truth in this, and a partial falsehood. . . . American race
prejudice has so pounded the mass of Negroes together that they have not separated into such economic classes; but on the other hand they undoubtedly have had
the ideology and if they had been free we would have had within our race the same
exploiting set-up that we see around about us.61
Immersed in research into post-Civil War "labor history," Du Bois was conscious of
the problems that had beset mass movements bringing together whites and Blacksproblems that he felt spokesmen for Communism ignored.62Though now clearly
ambivalent toward the Black petit bourgeoisie, he was still relying on the notion of
racial solidarity (imposed from without) to defend his class from attacks from the
Left. But by now Du Bois had begun to temper his own "Talented Tenth" program of
social mobilization. At the conference he seemed mildly distressed with the "vanguardism" with which he had been earlier identified. In point of fact he had appeared
to reverse his position. The Black elite of which he had been so optimistic in its
"natural" function of leadership of the Black masses was now understood to be
ideologically reactionary, a lesson he was learning within the National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People.63This question of ideology and its impact on
human motives and social relations would become a dominant theme of Black Reconstruction. But here, its immediate significance was its toll on Du Bois's thinking. It had
forced him to reassess the Black masses and their revolutionary significance. He had
at last begun to form a committed response to the indictment of the Black middle
class and its intelligentsia,which the recent events of the late 1920s and early 1930s represented: the emergence of the mass movement, the Universal Negro Improvement
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

197

Association; the formation of the militant nationalists into the African Blood Brotherhood; and the Scottsboro debacle, which pitted the conservative NAACP against the
Communist Party's International Labor D e f e n ~ eIn
. ~accord
~
with his criticisms of the
American Communist Party, Du Bois was addressing himself directly to the problem
of the alienation of the Black elite from the Black masses. He did this in part by
reminding that elite, subtly, of its dependence upon the masses.65Yet he still had not
himself reached the level of historical comprehension that he would demonstrate in
Black Reconstruction. There he would come to a realization of the historical forces
emergent from the people, specifically the capacities of the Black masses to take steps
decisive to their own liberation.
Finally, in the Rosenwald Conference lecture, we find that Du Bois's analysis of the
Depression, which international capitalism was experiencing in the i93os, parallels
his analysis of the crisis brought on by slavery in the earlier stage of American
capitalist development. Both economically and politically, the Depression and the
crisis of slavery would fundamentally transform the mode of capitalist relations.
Furthermore, both had precipitated revolutionary movements and revolutionary
social change.66
[Tlhe matter of greatest import is that instead of our facing today a stable world,
moving at a uniform rate of progress toward well-defined goals, we are facing
revolution. I trust you will not be as scared by this word as you were Thursday [Du
Bois was referring to the audience's reaction to a speech by Dr. Broadus Mitchell of
Johns Hopkins University]. I am not discussing a coming revolution, I am trying to
impress the fact upon you that you are already in the midst of a revolution; you are
already in the midst of war; that there has been no war of modern times that has
taken so great a sacrifice of human life and human spirit as the extraordinary
period through which we are passing today.
Some people envisage revolution chiefly as a matter of blood and guns and the
more visible methods of force. But that, after all, is merely the temporary and
outward manifestation. Real revolution is within. That comes before or after the
explosion-is a matter of long suffering and deprivation, the death of courage and
the bitter triumph of despair. This is the inevitable prelude to decisive and enormous change, and that is the thing that is on us now.
We are not called upon then to discuss whether we want revolution or not. We
have got it. Our problem is how we are coming out of it.67
On review, then, Du Bois had remarked on the weakness of American culture and its
political institutions in the face of a deep crisis in its economic structure. He was
concerned about the inability of the American Left as represented by the CPUSArecall he had already tried the American Socialist Party and found it wanting 21 years
before this lecture was given-to clearly identify the material force of racism as it
related to the Left's struggle to destroy capitalism and replace it with socialism. He
had exposed the ahistorical and materialistic ideology that dominated the Black elite
and Black leadership. And, finally, he had indicated the failure of American revolu198 B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

tionists to recognize that one of the objective conditions for revolution, one which
goes beyond the onslaught of economic crisis and emiseration, is a consciousness of
the social processes of revolution.
Du Bois, however, was concerned for why these things had become true for American society in the 1930s. He was interested in determining how it was possible that
American culture and its institutions had become so estranged from the democratic
ideal with which they had so long been structurally and ideologically identified.
Moreover, how was it possible that American socialists could be so ill-equipped to
deal with the Black worker, the Black community, and the social relations of Black
people? How had the Black elite become wedded ideologically to capitalism and
grown alienated and contemptuous of the Black masses? Why was twentieth-century
American revolutionary theory so ill-conceived, the revolutionary movement unrecognizable, and revolutionary change and transformation a matter of contingency
rather than praxis? He believed the answers to these questions resided in the history of
the Republic. More specifically, he pursued them in the contradictions of that history.
Slavery and Capitalism

In the beginning of Black Reconstruction, Du Bois identified the fundamental contradiction in American history; the contradiction that would subvert America's founding ideology, distort its institutions, traumatize its social relations and class formations, and, in the twentieth century, confuse its rebels and revolutionists:
From the day of its birth, the anomaly of slavery plagued a nation which asserted
the equality of all men, and sought to derive powers of government from the
consent of the governed. Within sound of the voices of those who said this lived
more than half a million black slaves, forming nearly one-fifth of the population of
a new nation. (p. 3)68
It was thus the black worker, as founding stone of a new economic system in the
nineteenth century and for the modern world, who brought civil war in America.
He was its underlying cause, in spite of every effort to base the strife upon union
and national power. (p. 15)
Now let us pay close attention to what Du Bois was saying: slavery was the specific
historical institution through which the Black worker had been introduced into the
modern world system. However, it was not as slaves that one could come to an
understanding of the significance that these Black men, women, and children had for
American development. It was as labor. He had entitled the first chapter to Black
Reconstruction, "The Black Worker."
The terms of his analysis were quite important to Du Bois. They were a part of his
beginning of the transformation of the historiography of American civilization-the
naming of things. In the changing of the names of things, he sought to provide the
basis for a new conceptualization of their relationship. In the first three chapters of his
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

I9Q

work, Du Bois established the rules of his analysis. The institution of American slave
labor could not be effectively conceptualized as a thing in and of itself. Rather, it was a
particular historical development for world capitalism that expropriated the labor of
African workers as primitive accumulation. American slavery was a subsystem of
world capitalism.
Black labor became the foundation stone not only of the Southern social structure,
but of Northern manufacture and commerce, of the English factory system, of
European commerce, of buying and selling on a world-wide scale; new cities were
built on the results of black labor, and a new labor problem involving all white
labor, arose both in Europe and America. (p. 5)
And American slavery would also consist of social relations given their character by
the ideology of white racial superiority.
[Tlhere was in 1863 a real meaning to slavery different from that we may apply to
the laborer today. It was in part psychological, the enforced personal feeling of
inferiority, the calling of another Master; the standing with hat in hand. It was the
helplessness. It was the defenselessness of family life. It was the submergence below
the arbitrary will of any sort of individual. (p. 9)
[The South's] subservient religious leaders reverted to the "curse of Canaan"; [its]
pseudo-scientists gathered and supplemented all available doctrines of racial inferiority; [its] scattered schools and pedantic periodicals repeated these legends . . .
a basis in reason, philanthropy and science was built up for Negro slavery. (p. 39)

All of this was necessary for the persistence of slavery through the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, and for its meteoric development in the early nineteenth century. The tissue of the nation would develop, coded by its slave past.
Labor, Capitalism, and Slavery

Du Bois was arguing that once slavery was addressed in comprehensive terms, in
world-historical terms, its true nature was revealed. Beneath its appearance as a
"feudal agrarianism" lay the real relation of slavery to the emergence of modern capitalism. As America was a critical subsector of this developing system, the conflicts
between American creed and reality, the contradictions of American society, the distortions of its social structures and political institutions ensued from its dependence
on slavery and would resound throughout the system into the twentieth century.69
Slavery, then, was not a historical aberration, it was not a "mistake" in an otherwise
bourgeois democratic age. It was, and its imprints continued to be, systemic.
Here is the real modern labor problem. Here is the kernel of the problem of
Religion and Democracy, of Humanity. Words and futile gestures avail nothing.
Out of the exploitation of the dark proletariat comes the Surplus Value filched
from human breasts which, in cultured lands, the Machine and harnessed Power
200

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

veil and conceal. The emancipation of man is the emancipation of labor and the
emancipation of labor is the freeing of that basic majority of workers who are
yellow, brown and black. (p. 1 6 ) ~ ~
In America, "free laborn-the vast majority of it supplied by immigrant Europeans
from Ireland, England, Italy, and Germany-was also profoundly affected:
The new labor that came to the United States, while it was poor, used to oppression
and accustomed to a low standard of living, was not willing, after it reached
America, to regard itself as a permanent laboring class and it is in the light of this
fact that the labor movement among white Americans must be studied. The successful, well-paid American laboring class formed, because of its property and
ideals, a petty bourgeoisie ready always to join capital in exploiting common
labour, white and black, foreign and native. (p. 17)
Eschewing the traditions forming in the European labor movements that would mature into the nineteenth century's socialisms of the First and Second Internationals,
syndicalism and anarchism, the transplanted European workers became preoccupied
with the possibility of accumulating wealth and power, of becoming capitalists.
Thus it was that American liberalism in the nineteenth century, with its ideals of
individualism and its antagonisms to socialism, became manifest in a particular way.
Its character was molded by an economic order that severely delimited material wellbeing and a racial consciousness that at one and the same time removed an entire
section of the working classes, the Blacks, from the possibility of access to that wellbeing while also supplying a fictive measure of status to non-Black workers.
The wisest of the leaders could not clearly envisage just how slave labor in conjunction and competition with free labor tended to reduce all labor toward slavery.
(P. 19)
It was only a minority of these non-Black workers that would join with liberal
intellectuals and freedmen to form the abolitionist movement.71Du Bois had stated
as early as 1915 that the "labor aristocracy" that was the result of the trade unionism of
a materialistic labor movement-in Germany, England, and France as well as in the
United States-was a crucial support to the imperialism and colonialism of the late
nineteenth century.72In the United States, Black and non-Black labor became politically opposed "instead of becoming one great party." The northern non-Black
working-class movement effectively excluded the freedmen, the slaves and the five
million poor whites of the South. (It was even more specificallyexclusionist after 1850
as it concentrated on a base of skilled industrial workers and craftsmen.) But it was a
more generalized antagonism that would envelop Black and non-Black workers.
During the Civil War itself, this conflict would erupt into race wars against Blacks.
With the enactment of the Draft Laws in 1863, and with the encouragement of "pro
slavery and pro-Southern" Copperheads from the North, the frustration of the nonBlack workers, with their living and working conditions and the war, were turned
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D T H E BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

201

against Blacks. In the summer of 1863, hundreds of Blacks were killed by mobs of
workers in New York City.
The report of the Merchants' Committee on the Draft Riot says of the Negroes:
"Driven by fear of death at the hands of the mob, who the week previous had,
as you remember, brutally murdered by hanging on trees and lamp posts, several
of their number, and cruelly beaten and robbed many others, burning and sacking their houses, and driving nearly all from the streets, alleys and docks upon
which they had previously obtained an honest though humble living-these people
had been forced to take refuge on Blackwell's Island, at police stations, on the outskirts of the city, in the swamps and woods back of Bergen, New Jersey, at Weeksville, and in the barns and out-houses of the farmers of Long Island and Morrisania."(p. log)
More than once, in Black Reconstruction, in his editorials in The Crisis, and other
works, Du Bois would return to this period in order to identify the roots of racial
violence in the labor movement of the twentieth century. It also provided, he believed, an explanation for the tradition of skepticism found among Blacks for organized labor.
What was true for the mainstream of the American labor movement was also a
factor in the radical traditions in the country. Though mid-nineteenth-century socialism had been largely transferred from areas of Europe where antipathies toward
Blacks were inconsequential, its adherents, too, had not been capable, generally, of
resisting the corrosive influences of slavery. This had been the case for both Marxist
and non-Marxist socialists. The precedents established during this period would be of
no substantial help to twentieth-century socialists whether their programs directly or
indirectly addressed themselves to "the Negro Problem."
Even when the Marxian ideas arrived, there was a split; the earlier representatives of
the Marxian philosophy in America agreed with the older Union movement in
deprecating any entanglement with the abolition controversy. After all, abolition
represented capital. The whole movement was based on mawkish sentimentality,
and not on the demands of the workers, at least of the white workers. And so the
early American Marxists simply gave up the idea of intruding the black worker into
the socialist commonwealth at that time. (pp. 24-25)
Though there had been exception^,'^ the lack of an identity between the interests of
Black and non-Black workers was fairly consistent in the labor movement. Wherever
one looked-among those who saw the movement in political-electoral terms, or
those who advocated revolutionary violence, or those who were committed to economic trade unionism-the labor movement was most often at best ambivalent
toward Black liberation and progress. The ideology of racism in combination with
self-interest functioned to pit immigrant and poor white workers against the Black
worker and the slave. And after the Civil War, the same social consciousness divided
the working classes-immigrant and white-from the ex-slave. More than twenty
202

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

years before the appearance of Black Reconstruction, and while his experience with
the Socialist Party was still fresh in his mind, Du Bois had recognized this as a
contradiction in the labor movement.74And during the intervening years, his anger
had not dissipated. When it reappeared in Black Reconstruction, it was no longer
simply a warning to a negligent labor movement, but an indictment. By then, the
labor movement and capitalism were older and in deep crisis. By then, Du Bois spoke
as a Black radical:
Indeed, the plight of the white working class throughout the world today is directly
traceable to Negro slavery in America, on which modern commerce and industry
was founded, and which persisted to threaten free labor until it was partially
overthrown in 1863. The resulting color caste founded and retained by capitalism
was adopted, forwarded and approved by white labor, and resulted in subordination of colored labor to white profits the world over. Thus the majority of the
world's laborers, by the insistence of white labor, became the basis of a system of
industry which ruined democracy and showed its perfect fruit in World War and
Depression. And this book seeks to tell that story. (p. 30)
Slavery and Democracy

We have already noted how the idea of slavery, to Du Bois's mind, was opposed to the
ideals of democracy. The ideology necessary to rationalize slavery disallowed the
further development of liberal democracy except as a myth. But Du Bois understood
that the relationship between slavery and democracy was not a question of the clash
of ideas. His approach to history was similar in this respect to that which Marx and
Engels had presented in The German Ideology:
This conception of history. . . comes to the conclusion that all forms and products
of consciousness cannot be dissolved by mental criticism, by resolution into "selfconsciousness" or transformation into "apparitions," "spectres," "fancies," etc., but
only by the practical overthrow of the actual social relations which give rise to this
idealistic humbug.75
For Du Bois, the creation of those political institutions and structures identified with
American democracy involved congruence with the country's economic character,
that is, with the slave system and capitalism. And so, though the American Constitution reflected the power of the plantocracy only in its devices for electoral representation, that had been sufficient advantage for the domination of the federal government
by that class during the Republic's first several decades. This had meant a domination
by a class that consisted of 7 percent of the South's population:
It had in American history chosen eleven out of sixteen Presidents, seventeen out of
twenty-eight Judges of the Supreme Court, fourteen out of nineteen AttorneysGeneral, twenty-one out of thirty-three Speakers of the House, eighty out of one
hundred thirty-four Foreign Ministers. (p. 47)
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

203

Consequent to this power, the plantocracy had established a legal structure that
effectively eliminated the civil rights of the nine million Black and poor white workers
to be found in the South in the mid-nineteenth century. This perversion of the
apparatus of representative democracy had survived the Civil War and the Reconstruction, and had persisted into the next century despite the challenges of Populism,
organized labor, political radicalism, the Depression, and the mass Black movement
m evolved into states' rights, the ideological dressing for
of the u ~ ~ ~ . ~ " e d e r a l i shad
first, slavery, and then the Black Codes, Jim Crow, and more contemporary forms of
repression. Each shift in the apparatus of repression had been associated with the
changing forms of exploitation as Blacks moved from being slaves to being sharecroppers and peons, and finally, to being proletariats or a labor reserve.
In the North, "the dictatorship of property" had been manifest in capital and investment. Not as rich or as powerful as the plantocrats in the beginning, the northern
merchants, manufacturers, and industrialists had developed on the backs of southern
agriculture and European labor. The North exploited its labor more efficiently, not
having to absorb the costs of developing it during its nonproductive years. Those
costs were incurred by the socioeconomic sectors of Ireland, Germany, Italy, and
England. The North supplied the middlemen between the South and its European
and domestic markets; it supplied the shipping and transportation for the South's
produce. It was also in the process of developing a national economy of total integration before the Civil War, while the South was becoming increasingly dependent.
In the world market, the merchants and manufacturers had all the advantages of
unity, knowledge, and purpose, and could hammer down the price of raw material.
The slaveholder, therefore, saw Northern merchants and manufacturers enrich
themselves from the results of Southern agriculture (p. 41).His capitalistic rivals of
the North were hard-working, simple-living zealots devoting their whole energy
and intelligence to building up an industrial system. They quickly monopolized
transport and mines and factories and they were more than willing to include the
big plantations. . . . The result was that Northern and European industry set prices
for Southern cotton, tobacco and sugar which left a narrow margin of profit for the
planter. (p. 37)
Capital, both industrial and financial, continued to grow until the northern industrialists could challenge the political power of the plantocrats. And while it grew, it
too undermined the structures of democracy:
The North had yielded to democracy, but only because democracy was curbed by a
dictatorship of property and investment which left in the hands of the leaders of
industry such economic power as insured their mastery and their profits. Less than
this they knew perfectly well they could not yield, and more than this they would
not. (p. 46)
Once the industrial class emerged as dominant in the nation, it possessed not only its
own basis of power and the social relations historically related to that power, but it
204

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

also had available to it the instruments of repression created by the now subordinate
southern ruling class. In its struggle with labor, it could activate racism to divide the
labor movement into antagonistic forces. Moreover, the permutations of the instrument appeared endless: Black against white; Anglo-Saxon against southern and eastern European; domestic against immigrant; proletariat against share-cropper; white
American against Asian, Black, Latin American, and so on.
Reconstruction and the Black Elite

One of the most revealing aspects of Black Reconstruction was Du Bois's assessment of
the Black petit bourgeoisie, that element of Black society with which he had been
most closely associated for most of his then 67 years. For the first time in his public
pronouncements, he was resolved to expose the extent to which his beloved elite,
through the logic of its own development, had moved apart from the Black masses. As
he reckoned it, the process of bourgeoisification and alienation that had begun during
slavery had not revealed its contradiction until the Reconstruction. Suddenly, the
petit bourgeoisie were confronted with the political expression of Black labor:
The difference that now came was that an indefinitely larger number of Negroes
than ever before was enfranchised suddenly, and 99 percent of them belonged to
the laboring class, whereas by law the Negroes who voted in the early history of the
country were for the most part property holders, and prospective if not actual
constituents of a petty bourgeoisie. (p. 350)
Still, during these first heady days following the Emancipation and the ending of the
Civil War, the Black petit bourgeoisie had presumed to lead. Quite soon, however, its
ideological and political vacuity had begun to be apparent, its leadership nominal and
at its best mere mediation between the demands of the Black masses and the power of
the ruling classes:
When freedom came, this mass of Negro labor was not without intelligent leadership, and a leadership which because of former race prejudice and the present Color
Line, could not be divorced from the laboring mass, as had been the case with the
poor whites. . . . Free Negroes from the North, most of whom had been born in the
South and knew conditions, came back in considerable numbers during Reconstruction, and took their place as leaders. The result was that the Negroes were not,
as they are sometimes painted, simply a mass of densely ignorant toilers. . . .
It was, however, a leadership which was not at all clear in its economic thought.
On the whole, it believed in the accumulation of wealth and the exploitation of
labor as the normal method of economic development. But it also believed in the
right to vote as the basis and defense of economic life, and gradually but surely it
was forced by the demand of the mass of Negro laborers to face the problem of
land. Thus the Negro leaders gradually but certainly turned toward emphasis on
economic emancipation. (pp. 350-51)
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

205

Inevitably, however, even these tenuous links between the elite strata and Black labor
had disintegrated. Du Bois now believed he understood the forces that had made a
mockery of the racial solidarity that had been the elite's evangelism.
First there was the ambivalence of the Black petit bourgeoisie:
The Negro's own black leadership was naturally of many sorts. Some, like the
whites, were petty bourgeois, seeking to climb to wealth; others were educated
men, helping to develop a new nation without regard to mere race lines, while a
third group were idealists, trying to uplift the Negro race and put them on a par
with the whites. . . . In the minds of very few of them was there any clear and
distinct plan for the development of a laboring class into a position of power and
mastery over the modern industrial state. (p. 612)
They were to pay, sometimes with their lives, when the changing order of privilege
concomitant to the continuing development of northern industrial wealth left them
vulnerable:
The bargain of 1876 . . . left capital as represented by the old planter class, the new
Northern capitalist, and the capitalist that began to rise out of the poor whites,
with a control of labor greater than in any modern industrial state in civilized
hands (p. 630). A lawlessness which, in 1865-1868, was still spasmodic and episodic,
now became organized, and its real underlying industrial causes obscured by political excuses and race hatred. Using a technique of mass and midnight murder, the
South began widely organized aggression upon the Negroes. . . . Armed guerrilla
warfare killed thousands of Negroes; political riots were staged; their causes or
occasions were always obscure, their results always certain: ten to one hundred
times as many Negroes were killed as whites. (p. 674)
The violence and terror that descended upon Blacks during the fifty years that followed Reconstruction, left the Black elite shaken and pared down to its opportunists:
Negroes did not surrender the ballot easily or immediately. . . . But it was a losing
battle, with public opinion, industry, wealth, and religion against them. Their own
leaders decried "politics" and preached submission. All their efforts toward manly
self-assertion were distracted by defeatism and counsels of despair, backed by the
powerful propaganda of a religion which taught meekness, sacrifice and humility
(pp. 692-93). This brings us to the situation when Booker T. Washington became
the leader of the Negro race and advised them to depend upon industrial education
and work rather than politics. The better class of Southern Negroes stopped voting
for a generation. (p. 694)
Through its wealth and educational institutions the Black elite survived, growing
more remote from the masses of Blacks as its ability to reproduce itself developed:
They avoided the mistake of trying to meet force by force. They bent to the storm
of beating, lynching and murder, and kept their souls in spite of public and private
206

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

insult of every description; they built an inner culture which the world recognizes
in spite of the fact that it is still half-strangled and inarticulate. (p. 667)
In this relative social isolation, its culture continued to adopt forms from the class
peers from which it was estranged by race. But by the constant terror, the entire Black
community had been turned in on itself; and by the persistence of poverty, its social
stratifications had been stabilized. However, the resources of the Black community
were too few to support a mobility of more than incremental significance. With the
Black migration to the North and West, which occurred at the turn of the century,
this situation would change but only slightly.77Meanwhile, though Du Bois still could
not admit it, the idealism of the Black petit bourgeoisie had been transformed into an
ideology that served to hold the Black community as a semi-preserve for the more
effective exploitation by its elite. As he had made clear at the Rosenwald Conference,
racial solidarity still overrode a radical critique of his class:
We must rid ourselves of the persistent idea that the advance of mankind consists
of the scaling off of layers who become incorporated with the world's upper and
ruling classes, leaving always dead and inert below the ignorant and unenlightened
mass of men. Our professional classes are not aristocrats and our masters-they are
and must be the most efficient of our servants and thinkers whose legitimate
reward is the advancement of the great mass of American Negroes and with them
the uplift of all men.78
Du Bois, Marx, and Marxism

There is, however, a final aspect of significance in Black Reconstruction that demands
close attention. From the vantage point of a Black radical historiography, Du Bois was
one of the first American theorists to sympathetically confront Marxist thought in
critical and independent terms. Undaunted by the political and personal concerns of
Blacks in the American Communist Party, which frequently manifested themselves as
a search for ideological orthodoxy in their work and writings, Du Bois had little
reason or awareness for cautiously threading an ideological position between Ruthenberg, Lovestone, and Foster in the CPUSA or Trotsky, Bukharin, and Stalin in the
Communist I n t e r n a t i ~ n a lAs
. ~ ~such, he could attempt to come to terms with Marx
himself unmediated by Lenin or the emerging doctrines to be known as MarxistL e n i n i ~ mAnd
. ~ ~ in so doing, he was articulating in theoretical terms the intersections
between the Black radical tradition and historical materialism only vaguely hinted at
in the formal organizations of the time. It was in those then irreconcilable roles-as a
Black radical thinker and as a sympathetic critic of Marx-that Du Bois was to make
some of his most important contributions concerning Black social movements. However, unless we continue to evoke a consciousness of the historical moment in which
Du Bois was working, we have little chance of recognizing the nature ofthe thought to
which he addressed himself in Black Reconstruction.
Since its inception, Marxism has meant to some a critical scientific system, a way of
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

207

understanding, comprehending, and affecting history.81The way in which Trotsky
expressed his own excitement about Marxism underscores this point: "The important
thing . . . is to see clearly. One can say of communism, above all, that it gives more
clarity. We must liberate man from all that prevents his seeing."s2 The history of
Marxist thought and Marxist organizations, however, has been more ambiguous.
Concomitant with this presumed clarity, this way of seeing, was the emergence of its
corrosives, its oppositions. The nature of change argued in Marxism, the dialectic,
would lead one to anticipate just such oppositions to occur in Marxism. Specifically
with the appearances of political dogma, historical certainty, and epistemological
variations on empiricism, the history of Marxist thinkers has confirmed this expectation. This is not merely a question of distinguishing the true Marxists-that is, the
"founders," Marx and Engels-from their less gifted e p i g ~ n iIt. ~is~not an intellectual
or theoretical problem.
Dogma, certainty, and facticity are social and political phenomena. In Marxism they
have emerged out of a context of specific organizational demands and definite collective and individual needs framed by particular historical and political dynamics. And it
was with respect to these phenomena as they had manifested themselves in the
American Communist Party organization in the late 1920s and early 1930sthat Du Bois
focused his work on revolutionary theory. To understand the significance to Marxist
thought of what Du Bois was doing it is only necessary to recall that the American
Communist Party in the 1930s was situated in the most advanced capitalist society in
the world. Consequently it was soon to be the second most important communist
party in the world, displacing the German movement but behind the Bolsheviks. To
Marxist-Communists, the historical role of the CPUSA had been determined by the
principles of Leninism: it was the vanguard of the most advanced proletarian movement.84 It was this party's ideological dogma, its existential creed and theoretical
orthodoxy as they related to Blacks that compelled Du Bois to a reassessment ofMarx.
The first war of the world in the twentieth century is a watershed for those events
that directly influenced the special character of the American Communist movement
and the party's policies toward Blacks. It was during the war, or because ofthe war, or in
the aftermath of the war that these events occurred. First, there was the transformation
of international socialism: the Comintern succeeded the Second International as the
leading force of the socialist movement. Second, in the United States, a Black emigration from the South resulted in the formation of northern, urban Black communities
and subsequently, a new form of racial consciousness: Black nationalism. Third,
beginning almost simultaneously with the formation of the American party, there was
the intercession of the Comintern: Lenin and then Stalin on the "Negro Question."
These were the critical events. It is necessary now to look at them in more detail.
Bolshevism and American Communism

The Second International succumbed to two forces: nationalism and revolutionary
failure. With regard to nationalism, World War I found the majority of the workers of
208

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

England, Germany, France, and Austro-Hungary willing to go to the battlefields
under national leadership in order to fight against each other. International worker
solidarity upon which socialism was based disintegrated. The socialist movement had
failed to maintain the dichotomy between the interests of workers and the interests of
capitalist ruling classes. State nationalism had triumphed as the dominant ideology of
the working classes. The pacifist tactics of the socialists had proved to be effective only
in those countries that were either noncombatants or those, like the United States,
which had been slow to enter the fray.85
Moreover, the revolutionary movements led by socialists failed-all, that is, but
one. The Bolshevik Party had gained control over the revolutions in Russia, but in
Germany, England, France, Hungary, and elsewhere, socialist revolutions either failed
to materialize or when they did were aborted.86Thus, in the most advanced industrialized societies-the presumed site of revolution-no revolutions were brought
about, no workers movements came to power. In point of fact, the only two successful
revolutions of the period had occurred in societies whose populations were predominantly peasants: Mexico and Russia. Not only were they predominantly peasant
societies but peasant movements had played critical roles in the triumphs of their
revolutions, throwing into question the presumption that industrial workers were to
be the "instruments of phil~sophy?~It is not surprising, then, that the organization
of the international socialist movement atrophied.
The Second International had also come increasingly to represent or signify that
revolution would come through the instruments and structures of bourgeois society:
. ~ ~ the Interpolitical reform through the institutions of bourgeois d e m o c r a ~ yWhen
national collapsed, so did its tactical and ideological resolutions. What appeared to
replace them was the Third International dominated by Lenin and the policies of his
Bolshevik cadre. Tactically, a renewed commitment to violent struggle became evident in the movement. Moreover, with the formation of the Third International, it
became necessary for member national parties to pledge their loyalties to the Comintern, the Soviet Union and, in practical terms, to the Bolshevik Party. The defense of
the Soviet Union was to be the highest priority. Party discipline was to conform to the
dictates of the Executive Committee of the Comintern-a Committee chaired by
Zinoviev, the second leading B o l s h e ~ i k : ~ ~
Each party desirous of affiliating with the Communist International should be
obliged to render every possible assistance to the Soviet Republics in their struggle
against all counter-revolutionary forces. The Communist parties should carry on a
precise and definite propaganda to induce the workers to refuse to transport any
kind of military equipment intended for fighting against the Soviet Republics, and
should also by legal or illegal means carry on a propaganda amongst the troops sent
against the workers' republics, etc.
. . . All the resolutions of the congresses of the Communist International, as well
as the resolutions of the Executive Committee are binding for all parties joining the
Communist InternationaLg0
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE B L A C K R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

209

Still, the vigor with which the Comintern pursued and institutionalized its hegemony
had no immediate effect on the American communist movement. The history and
organizations of revolutionary socialists and workers movements in the United States
had been too disparate for any authority, domestic or otherwise, to impose cohesion
and/or subordination.
The crucial social basis for radical workers' movements in the United States was
provided by the forces of labor recruited to American industrial production. Commenting on the first decade and a half of the twentieth century, Nathan Glazer argued:
One central fact about the American working class in this period, and during subsequent decades, too, must be remembered: it was largely composed of immigrants.
The working force in the steel mills, the coal mines, the textile factories, the clothing
shop was overwhelminglyforeign-born, and that part of it that was not was concentrated in supervisory jobs and in the more highly paid skilled occupation^.^^
Earlier, as we have seen, the African and Afro-American agrarian workers had
supplied the critical surplus value that supported the transformation of the economy
into an industrialized and ultimately capital-intensive one. In turn, late nineteenthcentury European immigrants-expropriated, trained, reproduced, and disciplined
by European sectors of the world economy (in Germany, England, Ireland, and Italy
primarily)-constituted the labor forces uniquely developed and historically necessary for the American industrial transformation. But most of these European immigrant workers had come from societies in which labor movements were already
developed. In fact most of these movements had by the mid-nineteenth century
developed unique and particular complexes of tactics, strategy, and ideology. Whole
traditions in these labor movements and oppositions in those traditions had been
achieved. These were a part of the political, organizational, and ideological cultures
that accompanied the foreign workers to America. Theodore Draper observes:
From the very outset, the American Socialist movement was peculiarly indebted to
the immigrants for both its progress and its problems. The first convention of the
Socialist Labor Party in 1877was composed of representatives of seventeen German
sections, seven English, three Bohemian, one French, and a general women's Section. Immigrants naturally assumed the role of teachers and organizers, but they
were mainly concerned with teaching and organizing themselves.
The Socialist Labor party was never more than an American head on an immigrant body.92
As these peoples dispersed and/or concentrated in the United States according to
various social and economic determinants, their traditions were either conserved,
adapted, or dissipated. Two ways in which they were conserved were through ethnicspecific and industrial-specific communities. The labor movement-whether it was
trade unionist, electoral-party, or revolutionary-was largely organized on the basis
of national, ethnic, and industrial groups:

210

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

In the Socialist Party of 1914, the membership in the Northeastern and Midwestern
states was largely. . . Jews, Germans, Poles, Czechs and Slovaks, Hungarians, South
Slavs, and many others. . . .
Later immigrant groups, however, formed parties or groupings that were still
related to the Socialist parties of their respective countries, of which so many had
been members. These federations of immigrant workers played a special role in
American socialism.93
This, then, was one critical contradiction in early American socialist development.
The organizing principle was ethnicity while at the same time nationalism-a logical
conclusion of ethnicity-endangered and frustrated socialist unity. Ethnicity dominated the movement organizationally, ideologically, conceptually, and theoretically.
This objective contradiction was a persistent character of the socialist and labor
movements and would reach critical proportions in response to both European and
American events (i.e., the Franco-Prussian War in the 1870s; World War I; and ethnic
competition for jobs and its subsequent violence).94Even among the minority sections of the socialist movement-the English-language federations-there was a basic
conflict between nationalism and socialism. Much of the membership ofthese federations was in fact made up from second-generation immigrant clusters. Among the
factors involved in the decision to become socialists and communists, Gabriel Almond argued, was the assimilative motive. Almond maintained that the Englishlanguage federations were influenced by both the organizational priority of Americanization so as to influence the development of a "native" American working class,
and their members' own sociopsychological needs.95
The American Communist Party was formed, then, during a time of some theoretical and ideological confusion. In point of fact, the movement in the United States
had broken down into so many competing ideological factions in the early 1920s that
it became necessary for the Comintern to impose order, uniting them into a single
party.96The party that resulted was dominated by foreign-language federations, the
most powerful being the Russian and Finnish federations. The federations, though,
were still often more concerned with the fortunes of the movement in their homelands than in America. Nationalism and nationalist rivalries were, consequently, a
When one adds to this situation the disputes
part of the party's historical ~haracter.~'
inherited from the Second International concerning the nature of capitalism and the
form the socialist revolution would assume, the appearance of Bolshevik hegemony
can be understood to have been both a further force for chaos and order. The success
of the Bolshevik party gave the Russian-language association an advantage-for a
time-in influencing party policy, but it also intensified ideological disputes and
theoretical quarrels, since the Bolsheviks were a historical anomaly in classical Marxist terms. But a form of Russian nationalism had assumed dominance in the American movement as it had throughout the Comintern. Though this idea was acceptable
to many in the American movement, it could also be expected to encounter opposi-

HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

211

tion especially among those peoples who had been historically subject to Tsarist
Russia's imperiali~m.~~
In a movement dominated by national parties and subparties,
the character of the Comintern and the consequent inflation of the political influence
of Russian nationals in the United States was bound to produce or revitalize counternationalisms. The growing power of specifically Russian Jews in the movement created or exasperated cleavages within the Communist movement that were not reRegardless, the direct influence of the Bolsheviks on
solved even by the late 1920s.~~
the American movement that had begun as early as late 1916-months before its own
spectacular successes and nearly three years before the first World Congress of the
Communist International-would seldom be seriously challenged in the next forty or
fifty years.
Black Nationalism

For Blacks, in sociological and political terms, one of the most important events in
American history at the time of the First World War was the migration to the sites of
urban and particularly northern industry. With the outbreak of the war, the European immigration of laborers had been severely restricted by both the exigencies of
war and Congressionally imposed controls. In addition, war-time conscription had
removed thousands of white workers from their jobs while at the same time war was
opening markets to U.S. goods and increasing the demand for labor. The war, then,
produced a labor scarcity in American industry. In such a labor market, workers had
an advantage in their demands for wage increases; and as the term of the war lengthened, job action as a labor tactic became more diffused among workers, including the
semi-skilled. Northeastern industrialists and their counterparts in the Midwest attempted to resolve the problem of increasing labor costs and labor militancy by
recruiting southern and Caribbean Blacks.
As we had noted, at this time the overwhelming majority of American Blacks lived
in the rural South. Despite the campaigns of terror and violence directed against
them, and which had been a constant undercurrent in their lives since the Reconstruction, most of them were still reluctant to break historical, social, and cultural ties
by migrating to confrontations with northern antipathies. To meet this problem,
corporate managers had developed a sophisticated propaganda campaign to excite
the interests of southern Black workers. Labor recruiters were sent South with instructions to fill the empty freight cars often accompanying them; Black newspapers
(some subsidized by northern industrialists), led by the Chicago Defender, ran articles
on the opportunities for employment in the North juxtaposed with accounts of the
anti-Black activities of southern whites. Robert Abbott, editor of the Defender, was
relentless:
Abbott put out a "national edition" of his weekly, aimed at southern blacks. It
carried in red ink such headlines as: loo NEGROES MURDERED WEEKLY I N UNITED
STATES BY WHITE AMERICANS;
LYNCHING-A NATIONAL DISGRACE;
and WHITE GEN212

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

TLEMAN RAPES COLORED GIRL.
Accompanying a lynching story was a picture of the
Poems
lynch victim's severed head, with the caption: NOT BELGIUM-AMERICA.
entitled Land of Hope and Bound for the Promised Land urged blacks to go North,
and editorials boosted Chicago as the best place for them to go. Want ads offered
jobs at attractive wages in and around Chicago. In news items, anecdotes, cartoons,
and photos, the Defender crystallized the underlying economic and social causes of
black suffering into immediate motives for flight.lU0

The promise of economic integration into some of the most advanced sectors of
American production had its impact. As noted, an estimated quarter of a million to a
million Black workers and their families migrated during the war years, substantially
increasing the populations of the Black communities situated in the critical industrial
areas east of the Mississippi.
This migratory flood coincided with one emanating from the English-speaking
West Indies. The poverty and deteriorating well-being of Caribbean Blacks were the
direct legacies of colonialism. Tens of thousands of West Indians came to the United
States during the first decades of the twentieth century. It was work, too, that attracted
them, and so they located in precisely the same Black communities that received the
internal migration:
One unusual and complicating feature of the New York ghetto in Harlem was the
presence of two quite different nonwhite populations. By far the larger was the
group of southern migrants, but a minority not to be ignored had originated in the
Caribbean islands, chiefly the British West Indies, with some from the Dutch West
Indies, Cuba, and Puerto Rico. To the 5000 foreign-born blacks who lived in New
York in 1900 were added 28,000 more during the war decade. In 1917 the New York
Times estimated that they formed one quarter of the population of Harlem.'O1
The congregating of these peoples, the deep disruptions that accompanied their
translocations, and the persistent hostility with which they were confronted forced
them on to each other, politically and socially. As such it became necessary for them
to develop social and political forms that would transcend the particularistic identities due to specific historical differences. It was within this particular milieu that
both the UNIA and the African Blood Brotherhood (ABB) emerged; and both would
have enormous consequence for the American Communist Party's efforts at organizing Blacks.
It has never been possible to characterize the United Negro Improvement Association in precise terms. Its dominant ideology was eclectic: incorporating elements of
Christianity, socialism, revolutionary nationalism, and race solidarity. As an organization; it exhibited a range of structures responsive to circumstance and personality.
Responsibility for policy- and decision-making varied as well. They were formed in
accordance with ideological factors: the circumstance of situationally crucial individuals; the nature of the issues; and the momentary fortunes of the organization. Too,
the organization did change over time, responding to the political and social signifiHISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK RADICAL TRADITION

213

cances of the interactions between itself and its social and political environment.
Nevertheless, observers have most frequently typified the organization as ideologically a "back to Africa" movement; or for very different reasons, and with implicit
organizational characterizations, as "the Garvey movement." It was never quite so
obviously simple.lo2
The UNIA'S main thrust appears to have been toward the development of a powerful Black nation economically organized by a modified form of capitali~m.'~~
This
powerful entity was to become the guardian of the interests of Blacks in Africa (where
it was to be located) and those dispersed in the African diaspora. The nation was to be
founded on a technocratic elite recruited from the Black peoples of the world. This
elite, in turn, would create the structures necessary for the nation's survival and its
development until it was strong enough to play its historical role and absorb and
generate subsequent generations of trained, disciplined nationalists. As a number of
historians have noted, in many ways both directly and indirectly, the UNIA had
incorporated elements of the self-help movement identified with Booker T. Washington; but without the restrictions imposed upon that movement, the UNIA had
pushed the concept to its logical conclusion.104In pursuit of this ideal, the organization had developed structures that anticipated a national formation. The UNIA had
possessed a protonational bureaucracy; security forces with women auxiliaries; a
national church; an international network of chapters (or consulates); and the beginnings of an economic base consisting of a series of small businesses and service
industries. Hundreds of thousands-perhaps millions-of Blacks were enrolled in the
organization. Though recruitment went on primarily in the United States and the
West Indies, the UNIA possessed dues-paying members in Africa and Latin America.
The scale of the organization made the UNIA by far and away the largest nationalist
organization to emerge among Blacks in America. In these terms, the organization's
significance still remains unrivalled in U.S. history.ln5
Since most histories of the organization were written by its critics, distortions of
the UNIA abound in the literature. They are especially marked with regard to its
founder and principal organizer, Marcus Garvey.lo6Even Du Bois, while participating
in the opposition to the UNIA,had contributed exposes of its financial practices and
bitter characterizations of Garvey.lo7But the one predominant tactic of the UNIA'S
critics was to identify the organization with Garvey, thus tending to reduce their
criticisms to studies of aberrant personality or political opportunism. Robert Bagnall,
one such critic, writing in A. Philip Randolph's and Chandler Owen's paper, The
Messenger, described Garvey as
a Jamaican Negro of unmixed stock, squat, stocky, fat, and sleek, with protruding
jaws, and heavy jowls, small bright pig-like eyes and rather bull-dog-like face.
Boastful, egotistic, tyrannical, intolerant, cunning, shifty, smooth and suave, avaricious; . . . as adept as a cuttle-fish in beclouding an issue he cannot meet, prolix in
the nth degree in devising new schemes to gain the money of poor ignorant
Negroes; gifted at self-advertisement, without shame in self-laudation, promising
214

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

ever, but never fulfilling, without regard for veracity, a lover of pomp and tawdry
finery and garish display, a bully with his own folk but servile in the presence of the
Klan, a sheer opportunist and demagogic charlatan.Io8
Others with more charity came to the same point. Claude McKay would write in his
Harlem: Negro Metropolis:
The movement of Marcus Garvey in Harlem was glorious with romance and
riotous, clashing emotions. Like the wise men of the ancient world, this peacockparading Negro of the New World, hoodooed by the "Negromancy" of Africa,
followed a star-a Black Star. A weaver of dreams, he translated into a fantastic
pattern of reality the gaudy strands of the vicarious desires of the submerged
members of the Negro race.
There has never been a Negro leader like Garvey. None ever enjoyed a fraction of
his universal popularity. He winged his way into the firmament of the white world
holding aloft a black star and exhorting the Negro people to gaze upon and follow
it.'09
In this way the UNIA became known as "the Garvey movement." This has always
implied or bespoken the presence of autocratic authority and demagoguery. As principal spokesman and symbol of the UNIA,Garvey became the object of study rather
than the masses of people involved in making the organization. Robert Hill, Tony
Martin, and Theodore Vincent are three historians who have recently begun to
correct that fault.
The UNIA'S official demands, set down in a Declaration of Rights of the Negro
Peoples of the World, included the right to vote, a fair share of political patronage,
representation on juries and on the judge's bench, and full freedom of press,
speech, and assembly for all. The UNIA sought these basic freedoms primarily to
create and strengthen a separate black world, while groups like the NAACP would
utilize these freedoms primarily to create an integrated world.
Socially, the UNIA was a huge club and fraternal order. . . . For Garveyites, there
was the fraternal camaraderie of all the black people of the world. UNIA parades,
Saturday night parties, women's group luncheons, etc., had a significance far beyond that of providing social diversion. Their affairs were designed to build a pride
and confidence in blackne~s."~
Clearly, the UNIA possessed a substantial cadre and several tiers of secondary leadership. It was a complex organization functioning on a number of levels simultaneously.
And its popular appeals and attractive political style were combined with pragmatic
programs of racial achievement. For the five years of its peak development, from 1918to
1923, it became the most formidable movement in the history of American Blacks.
Like the UNIA,the organizational cadre of the African Blood Brotherhood consisted largely of West Indians and Afro-Americans who had developed professionally
as social agitators and journalist-propagandists. Its founding organizers in 1919 were
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

215

Cyril Briggs (Nevis Island), Richard B. Moore (Barbados), and W. A. Domingo
(Jamaica)."' Later, in the period between 1920 and 1922, Otto Huiswoud (Surinam)
and a number of important Afro-American radicals joined the movement, including
Otto Hall, Haywood Hall (Harry Haywood), Edward Doty, Grace Campbell, H. V.
Phillips, Gordon Owens, Alonzo Isabel, and Lovett Fort-Whiteman.l12
The largest membership was in the New York home office, but there were sizable
contingents in Chicago, Baltimore, Omaha and West Virginia. . . . The ABB also
established groups in the Caribbean area; in Trinidad, Surinam, British Guiana,
Santo Domingo and the Windward Islands. At its height, the ABB had only three to
five thousand members, most of them ex-servicemen. . . . The number was kept
small, in part by design, but the possibilities of danger, and the Brotherhood's
militantly nationalistic and left-wing ideology, undoubtedly alienated and confused many people. The ABB saw itself as a tight-knit, semi-clandestine, paramilitary group which hoped to act for a "worldwide federation" of black organizations.
The Brotherhood's official program stated, in part: "In order to build a strong and
effective movement on the platform of liberation for the Negro people, protection
of their rights to Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness, etc., all Negro organizations should get together on a Federation basis, thus creating a united centralized
rno~ement."~
For the bulk of its dozen-odd years of existence, the ABB was a secret, paramilitary
organization dedicated to the "immediate protection and ultimate liberation of Negroes everywhere."l14 This aspect of its ideology, however, was not a true reflection of
its origins or future.
When the Brotherhood was first proposed in Briggs's monthly magazine, The
Crusader, it was designated The African Blood Brotherhood "for African Liberation
and Redemption." Even earlier, though, The Crusader had
advertised itself as the "Publicity Organ of the Hamitic League of the World" (June
1919, p. 1). This so-called Hamitic League, with headquarters in Omaha, Nebraska,
set itself the task of uniting the so-called Hamitic peoples, the chief ethnic group of
North Africa. One of its leaders, George Wells Parker, made contact with Briggs
and they agreed to support each other. . . . The reference to the Hamitic League was
removed from The Crusader in the issue of January 1921.''~
The Brotherhood's beginnings inadvertently exposed a degree of identity-confusion
among its founders. A similar confusion would mark its appeals and the designation
of the audience the organization presumed to address.l16 In the next decade, that
audience would be transformed from Hamitics to Africans, then Negroes and, finally,
Black workers. Behind the fluctuations, however, was the premise enunciated by
Briggs in 1917:
Departing from Garvey's plan for a Negro state in Africa, he advanced the idea that
the "race problem" could be solved by setting up an independent Negro nation on
216

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

American territory. "Considering that the more we are outnumbered, the weaker
we will get, and the weaker we get the less respect, justice or opportunity we will
obtain, is it not time to consider a separate political existence, with a government
that will represent, consider, and advance us?" he argued."'
Briggs, for one, had spun away from the paternalistic projects of African colonization
and African missionizing that had concerned "race-men" like Crummell, Turner, and
Du Bois, and his fellow West Indians, Blyden, Garvey, and J. Albert Thorne.'l8
It seems fair to say that the African Blood Brotherhood had begun as a revolutionary nationalist organization.l19It soon, however, came to be influenced by the socialism of Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin, and state Bolshevism. And once several of its cadre were
absorbed into the American Communist Party, it came to be accepted that in both the
United States and Africa, the Brotherhood would act as an ideological, organizait was
tional, and military vanguard. In its closest rapprochement with the CPUSA,
conceived as the core of a liberating force developed in the hinterlands of Africa and
the shock troops of a Black and white revolutionary movement in the United States.120
Finally, the Brotherhood, or at least prominent members of that organizationBriggs, Moore, and especially Harry Haywood-appears to have provided to the Party
the immediate ideological stimulus for the development of the Comintern's position
after 1928 that Blacks constituted a "national question" in America.lZ1
Within a year or two of its founding in 1919, the Brotherhood's leadership in New
York and Chicago was acting in concert with officials ofthe Communist movement in
attempting infiltration and/or subversion of the UNIA. The leaders of the UNIA,
having found difficulty in respecting Black nationalists who had conceded the principles of autonomous leadership and "race first" action, were now the subjects of
intrigues, public charges and recriminations, and betrayals. Though several historians have traced the antagonism between the Brotherhood and the UNIA to supposed
differences on the issues of the roles of socialism and white workers in the Black
movement, they do not appear to be the crux of the matter. Much of the rancor
between the organizations was a result of the Brotherhood's insidious tactics, its
growing dependence and domination by the CPUSA,and its persistent attempts-by
Briggs, Domingo, Moore, and others-to unseat Garvey and the rest of the UNIA'S
"Negro Zionist" leaders. According to Tony Martin, Briggs's several cycles of positionreversals toward the UNIA were begun in 1921. In anticipation of the UNIA'S First
International Convention, Briggs
offered Garvey a proposition-that Garvey (with his international mass movement, perhaps millions strong) should enter into a program of joint action with
the ABB (an obscure organization of a thousand or two) for African liberation. . . .
Briggs then took the opportunity provided by Garvey's assembled multitude to do
a little recruiting for himself and passed around copies of the ABB program.
The next ploy in Briggs' attempt to impose a communist united front on Garvey
was to have his white communist friend Rose Pastor Stokes address the convention.
She expatiated on Russia's desire to free Africa and on the need for black-white
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

2l l

working class unity. She then called on Garvey to take a stand in relation to her
communist overtures. Garvey was polite but noncommittal. The final stroke in
Briggs' strategy was to have ABB delegates to the convention introduce a motion for
endorsement of the communist program. The motion was debated and tabled. The
ABB, piqued at this setback, them immediately published a Negro Congress Bulletin
on August 24, almost entirely devoted to a scurrilous misrepresentation of the UNIA
convention.122
Whatever motives Briggs and his associates might have had, this pattern of contradictory approaches to the UNIA would characterize the relations of the two organizations
until the demise of the Brotherhood in the 1930s. In the Party, Briggs, Moore, Haywood, Otto Hall, Fort-Whiteman, and others found a complementary radical element and a potential international ally for the struggle against colonialism and world
capital. Within the UNIA, Garvey for one, felt much more sympathy for the Russian
Communists than for the Brotherhood and its American Communist colleag~es.'~~

Blacks and Communism

In its beginnings, the American Communist movement required no special policy
with regard to Blacks. Having been constituted from the rebellious Left Wing of the
socialist movement did not signify for these communists a departure from the presumption that Blacks were simply a segment of the unskilled working ~1asses.I~~
Moreover, with the American socialist movement drawn predominantly from immigrant ethnic and national minorities, the notion of class solidarity was of substantial
importance to the movement, theoretically and practically. It provided a category
of political activity through which the diverse social elements of the revolutionary
movement-ethnics and nationalities, workers and intellectuals-could be reconciled, transcending their several particular interests. The absence of such a class
consciousness among Blacks, and in its stead the presence of a racial consciousness,
was seen by early American Communists as both an ideological backwardness and a
l ~ ~the degree that
potential threat to the integrity of the socialist movement i t ~ e 1 f .To
the early movement became aware of Black nationalism, that, too, would be unacceptable. Black nationalism was intolerable to a movement so constantly close to
foundering on national and ethnic divisions. This concern was made manifest by the
frequency with which "Back to Africa" ideologies were described as "Zionist" and
compared to "Back to Palestine" movements among the Jews-a substantial and
~ ~ party consistently opinfluential minority in the early socialist m 0 ~ e m e n t . lThe
posed Black nationalism until its own variant: self-determination, emerged in the
Soviet Union in 1928. The UNIA, as the strongest organization among Blacks with a
nationalist ideology, was characterized as a bourgeois reactionary group and made a
focus of the attack on Black nationalism. American racism did not justify the program of Black nationalism. European immigrants with other than Anglo-Saxon origins were also targets of racist abuses and discriminations. Racism, then, was merely
118

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

an element of ruling-class ideology and white "chauvinism" its political position.
Thus the social context of Blacks was adapted by ideologues in the socialist movement
to the social experience of European immigrant ~ 0 r k e r s . l ~ ~
The Communist parties did not actively recruit Blacks until 1921. This change in
policy seems to be largely the responsibility of Lenin, and is even more remarkable
when we recall that Lenin's name was barely known to any of the national elements in
the American movement four years earlier.12*Nevertheless, it was Lenin who raised
the "Negro Question" at the Second Congress of the Communist International in
1920. And it was Lenin who wrote to the party in America, "some time in 1921
expressing surprise that their reports to Moscow made no mention of party work
among Negroes and urging that they should be recognized as a strategically important element in Communist activity.129The American Communist Party then began
its recruitment of Blacks, primarily, though, radical Black intellectuals and nationalist
organizers. The nucleus, as we have pointed out, was those who made up the majority
of the Supreme Council of the African Blood Brotherhood. Still, the historical and
theoretical antecedents of the American Communist Party's work among American
Blacks and its eventual positions on Black nationalism were substantially drawn from
the experiences of Russian revolutionists.
In the same year that Lenin had addressed the Second Congress of the Comintern,
he had written in "Lefc-Wing" Communism-An Infantile Disorder:
[T]o reject compromises "on principle," to reject the permissibility of compromises in general, no matter of what kind, is childishness,which it is difficult even to
consider seriously. . . . There are different kinds of compromises.130
Here Lenin was mounting an attack on what he termed "left opportunism," that is,
political action and judgment that used the texts of Marx and Engels to criticize and
oppose Lenin and the Bolshevik Party's leadership. The setting was 1920. In Russia,
the civil war was still undecided; and in Europe, the revolutionary movement had
been "temporarily" defeated. Lenin was urging a tactical retreat. This document was
meant to stem criticism that emerged from other Russian revolutionists who insisted
that the revolution must maintain an international arena and scope, and could not be
secured in one national territory. Through the document and other activities, Lenin
hoped to defuse the "left deviationists" before they became an unmanageable and
disruptive force at the Second Congress, and broke the Bolshevik Party's control and
direction of the Third International. Despite its logical inconsistencies, historical
omissions, and distortions, and its contradictions of Marxist theory, his document
became one of the most significant works of the first decade of the Third International. Much of this was to be attributed to Lenin's authority in the movement as
the world's most powerful Communist; but as important was the work's legitimation
of accommodation to world capitalism and imperialism. It provided a pragmatic
modus vivendi for Communist parties elsewhere to survive while maintaining the
illusion of being revolutionary rather than reformist.I3l
The thread of Lenin's argument and his political declarations could be traced
H I S T O R I O G R A P H Y A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

219

stylistically to his critique of the "Left Communists" in 1918, when in writing ''LeftWing" Childishness and the Petty-Bourgeois Mentality, Lenin had been forced to defend the development of state-capitalist bureaucracy and the Brest Treaty with the
Ukrainian government. Substantively, the thread could be found in his characterization of the revolutionary party as the vanguard of the revolutionary masses:
By educating the workers' party, Marxism educates the vanguard of the proletariat,
capable of assuming power and leading the whole people to socialism, of directing
and organizing the new system, of being teacher, the guide, the leader of all the
working and exploited people in organizing their social life without the bourgeoisie and against the bourgeoisie.13*
To Lenin, the party was the possessor of true historical consciousness, and was the
true instrument of history. The party was Marxist theory in practice. It did what it did
because the proletariat had demonstrated that it was insufficiently class-conscious.133
It followed, then, for Lenin, that opposition to the tasks defined for itself by the party
could only come from two sources: the reactionary bourgeoisie on the right, and
the pseudo-Marxist, petit bourgeoisie "intellectual" opportunists on the left. If, in
order to survive, the party acting as the state compromised with Germany, AustroHungary, Bulgaria, and Turkey (the Quadruple Alliance) at Brest-Litovsk, it could
not be accused of compromising in general. The alternative had been continued war
and defeat. One must distinguish, Lenin argued, between "obligatory" compromises
(preservation) and those compromises that transformed one into "accomplices in
banditry." The Bolshevik Party made only obligatory compromises . . . except when it
made "minor and easily remediable" errors. With a bit of sophistry, Lenin declared:
What applies to individuals also applies-with necessary modifications-to politics
and parties. It is not he who makes no mistakes that is intelligent. There are no such
men, nor can there be. It is he whose errors are not very grave and who is able to
rectify them easily and quickly that is intelligent.134
Programmatically and tactically, Lenin was laying the grounds for member parties of
the Comintern in Europe and elsewhere to assume nonrevolutionary positions for
the moment. Party members were instructed to join parties, movements, and organizations and to attempt to influence policy toward reformist demands necessarily
intolerable to capitalism. "Communists should not rest content with teaching the
proletariat its ultimate aims, but should lend impetus to every practical move leading
the proletariat into the struggle for these ultimate aims."135
In 1920, and again in 1921, Lenin had indicated disappointment in the direction and
organizational priorities established by the American Communist Party. He suggested further that Blacks should play a critical role in the party and in the vanguard
of the workers' movement since Blacks occupied the most oppressive sector of the
American society, and were clearly to be expected to be the most angry element in the
United States. All of this was somewhat characteristic of Lenin as he rationalized the
basic opportunism that had dominated the history of the Bolshevik m 0 ~ e m e n t . l ~ ~
220

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

However, Lenin had found no basis of support for his declarations within the American delegation to the Second Congress. Indeed, in the person of the Harvard-trained
revolutionary writer, John Reed, the American delegation, preoccupied with the
image of the UNIA,repudiated Lenin's position:
Reed defined the American Negro problem as "that of a strong racial and social
movement, and of a proletarian labor movement advancing very fast in classconsciousness." He alluded to the Garvey movement in terms that ruled out all
Negro nationalism and separatism: "The Negroes have no demands for national
independence. All movements aiming at a separate national existence for Negroes
fail, as did the 'Back to Africa Movement' of a few years ago. They consider themselves first of all Americans at home in the United States. This makes it very much
simpler for the Comm~nists."'~~
For the time being, the Comintern was satisfied by a vague plan to invite Black
revolutionists to a future congress.
Two such figures attended the Fourth Congress of the Communist International in
1922: Otto Huiswoud, as an official delegate, and Claude McKay, as an unofficial and
non-Communist observer. McKay and Huiswoud ("the mulatto delegate," as McKay
would refer to him in his autobiography, A Long W a y From Home)tended to complement each other in both official and informal discussions of the "Negro Question."
When the American Negro delegate was invited to attend meetings and my mulatto
colleague went, the people asked: "But where is the chorny (the black)?" The
mulatto delegate said: "Say, fellow, you're all right for propaganda. It's a pity you'll
never make a disciplined party member."138
And with the aid of the Japanese revolutionary, Sen Katayama, who had spent some
time in the United States working as a cook and other things on the west and east
coasts, had been a founder of the unified and Bolshevized American Party, and now
sat on the commission for national and colonial questions,139McKay and Huiswoud
successfully presented to the Comintern sessions a more realistic basis for discussion.
And it was at the Fourth Congress that the Comintern made its first formal declaration of policy toward American Blacks: Early the following year, Rose Pastor Stokes,
the radical wife of J. C. Phelps Stokes one of the NAACP'smillionaire-sponsors,
returned to the United States and reported to her fellow party members:
One of the most significant developments in the Fourth Congress of the Communist International was the creation of a Negro Commission and the adoption of the
Commission's Thesis on the Negro Question which concludes with the declaration that "the Fourth Congress recognizes the necessity of supporting every form
of Negro Movement which tends to undermine capitalism and Imperialism or to
impede their further progress," pledges the Communist International to fight "for
race equality of the Negro with the White people, for equal wages and political
and social rights," to "exert every effort to admit Negroes into Trade Unions"
HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

221

and to "take immediate steps to hold a general Negro Conference or Congress
in Moscow,"
Two American Negroes were guests of the Congress. One, a poet, the other a
speaker and organizer, both young and energetic, devoted to the cause ofNegro liberation and responsive to the ideals of the revolutionary proletariat. They charmed
the delegates with their fine personalitie~.'~~
According to Mrs. Stokes, the Negro Commission itself was international in its membership, made up of delegates from the United States, Belgium, France, England, Java,
British South Africa, Japan, Holland, and Russia. The perspective of the Commission
was thus international, reflecting the internationalism of Marxist organization, the
theory of capitalism, and its membership. As the chairman of the Commission,
Comrade Sasha [Stokes] had announced:
[Tlhe world Negro movement must be organized: in America, as the center of
Negro culture and the crystallization of Negro protest; in Africa, the reservoir
of human labor for the further development of Capitalism; in Central America
(Costa Rica, Guatemala, Colombia, Nicaragua, and other "Independent" Republics), where American Imperialism dominates; in Puerto Rico, Haiti, Santo Domingo and other islands washed by the waters of the Caribbean . . . in South Africa
and the Congo . . . in East Africa.I4l
The work among Blacks in America, then, was to be one sector in a world movement
against colonialism and imperialism as the contemporary stages of world capitalism.
The Communist International was to be the vehicle through which the enslaved white
workers of Europe and America and the "revolutionary workers and peasants of the
whole world" would converge on the common enemy:
It is the task of the Communist International to point out to the Negro people that
they are not the only people suffering from the oppression of Capitalism and
Imperialism; that the workers and peasants of Europe and Asia and of the Americas
are also the victims of Imperialism; that the struggle against Imperialism is not the
struggle of any one people but of all the peoples of the world; that in China and
India, in Persia and Turkey, in Egypt and Morocco the oppressed colored colonial
peoples are rising against the same evils that the Negroes are rising against-racial
oppression and discrimination, and intensified industrial exploitation; that these
peoples are striving for the same ends that the Negroes are striving for-political,
industrial and social liberation and eq~a1ity.l~~
Notwithstanding its contradictions and ideological formulations, this Theses on the
Negro Question was a quite remarkable document. Certainly its New World-centric
view limited it (for example, the proposition that the "center of Negro culture and. . .
protest" was in America). Certainly the presumption that a proletarianized Black
people in America was the most advanced sector of the Black world was more a
vulgarization of Marx than a product of analysis. But just as certain, this statement
221

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

was a more sophisticated presentation of the world system than had been developed
in the earlier internationalism of the UNIA.The Commission had successfully urged
the Fourth Congress to recognize the relationship between the "Negro Question" and
the "Colonial Question."
The intention behind the Negro Commission of the Fourth Congress was to substitute system- and class-consciousnessfor race-consciousness among American Blacks.
Yet one enduring lesson learned from the UNIA was that Blacks were capable of
organizing on an international scale. The Negro Commission suggested that the
UNIA'S was only a particular form of race-consciousness and that it was possible for
race-consciousness to be transformed into a progressive force. A world-historical
race-consciousness, recognizing the exploitation of Blacks as Blacks, but as part of
and related to the exploitation of other workers could develop from the earlier form.
The historical problem posed before the Comintern and its member parties-and
especially for American Communism-was whether the Communist movement had
the capabilities to perform this transformation. Starting with the efforts of Huiswoud, McKay, and Katayama, it had become increasingly clear to the leadership of the
Comintern-Radek, Zinoviev, Trotsky, Lenin, and later, Stalin-that only a special
program could attract large numbers of Black workers to the movement. After 1922,
the tutelage and training of Black cadres in the Soviet Union was taken quite seriously.
The most critical of the results was the formulation of the "nation within a nation"
thesis announced by the Sixth Congress in 1928.
Haywood Hall (Harry Haywood) was one of the American Blacks brought to the
Soviet Union to study at the University of Toilers of the East (KUTVA). When he
arrived in April 1926, he joined a small colony of Black students that included his
brother Otto Hall (John Jones) 0 . J. and Jane Golden, Harold Williams (Dessalines),
Roy Mahoney (Jim Farmer), Maude White (who arrived in December 1927), and
Bankole (a Gold Coast inhabitant).143Of the seven Black students at K U T ~ A ' ~and
* the
Blacks who arrived in the Soviet Union as delegates to the Sixth Congress in 1928,
Haywood alone advocated the position of "self-determination" for American Blacks.
Haywood's own conversion had come in the Winter of 1928 when in preparation for
the Congress, he had responded to a dismissive report on the UNIA authored by his
brother, Otto:
In the discussion, I pointed out that Otto's position was not merely a rejection of
Garveyism but also a denial of nationalism as a legitimate trend in the Black
freedom movement. I felt that it amounted to throwing out the baby with the
bathwater. With my insight sharpened by previous discussions, I argued further
that the nationalism reflected in the Garvey movement was not a foreign transplant, nor did it spring full-blown from the brow of Jove. On the contrary, it was an
indigenous product, arising from the soil of Black super-exploitation and oppression in the United States. It expressed the yearnings of millions of Blacks for a
nation of their own.
As I pursued this logic, a totally new thought occurred to me, and for me it was
H I S T O R I O G R A P H Y A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

223

the clincher. The Garvey movement is dead, I reasoned, but not Black nationalism.
Nationalism, which Garvey diverted under the slogan of Back to Africa, was an
authentic trend, likely to flare up again in periods of crisis and stress. Such a
movement might again fall under the leadership of utopian visionaries who would
seek to divert it from the struggle against the main enemy, U.S. imperialism, and on
to a reactionary separatist path. The only way such a diversion ofthe struggle could
be forestalled was by presenting a revolutionary alternative to Blacks.
. . . I was the first American communist (with perhaps the exception of Briggs) to
support the thesis that U.S. Blacks constituted an oppressed nation.145
N. Nasanov (Bob Katz), a Russian representative of the Young Communist League,
having spent some time in the United States, was already convinced that American
Blacks constituted a national question. Katayama was as well, and suggested to Haywood that Lenin had supported the idea. But they, and similarly minded Soviet
Communists, had found difficulty in locating any American Blacks to support their
position.'46Nasanov heard Haywood's arguments and promptly requested his collaboration. From the moment Haywood voiced his commitment to Black nationalism,
the momentum was established for the self-determination line that would become
the Comintern's official policy after the Congress. The resolutions and discussion
papers drafted by Haywood and Nasanov eventually culminated in the language on
the "American Negro Question" included in the Congress report, "Theses on the
Revolutionary Movement in the Colonies and Semi-Colonies," 12 December 1928:

In those regions of the South in which compact Negro masses are living, it is
essential to put forward the slogan of the Right of Self-determination for Negroes.
A radical transformation of the agrarian structure of the Southern States is one of
the basic tasks of the revolution. Negro Communists must explain to non-Negro
workers and peasants that only their close union with the white proletariat and
joint struggle with them against the American bourgeoisie can lead to their liberation from barbarous exploitation, and that only the victorious proletarian revolution will completely and permanently solve the agrarian and national questions of
the Southern United States in the interests of the overwhelming majority of the
Negro population of the country.147
Black self-determination was presented to the American Communist Party as a fait
accompli. And for years the true origins of the line would be a mystery to members
of the American Communist movement as well as to its historian^.'^^ Its meaning, however, was clear: as Josef Pogany (John Pepper) characterized it (or as Haywood argues, caricatured it) in the line's first American exposure, the logic of selfdetermination would conclude in a "Negro Soviet R e p ~ b l i c . " ~ ~ ~
As a strategy, Black self-determination addressed itself to several concerns within
the Comintern and the American movement. First of all, by the procedure through
which it was established, it underlined the leadership of the Comintern over its
national parties. Moreover, legitimated by the existence of other national liberation
224

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

movements as well as the earlier history of American Blacks, it also relieved somewhat
the disappointments of some Third Internationalists caused by the failure of an
immediate world revolution to develop-national liberation struggles were by their
nature protracted ones. As a political model, it was also useful as a means of expression for those nationalisms and chauvinisms of longer duration in the American
Communist Party: many ideologues in the American movement identified their own
Finally, it was believed it was the
nationalist sensibilities with Black nati~nalism.'~~
most effective means of approaching one of the oldest American peoples, the "Negro,"
first through its radical nationalist intelligentsia, and then its masses. Not only should
self-determination attract Blacks, it was argued, but it could also be the litmus for
determining the degree of progressiveness among non-Black party militants while
weakening the ruling class by jarring the Bourbon pseudo-aristocracy from its industrial and finance-capitalist sponsors.
Still the theoretical basis for the party's identification of Blacks as a nation was quite
unorthodox in terms of Marxist theory. Marx and Engels had both distinguished
between "nations" and "nationalities," recognizing in the former the capacity for
independent economic existence and in the latter an incapacity. Engels had expressed
himself quite clearly:
There is no country in Europe where there are not different nationalities under the
same government. . . . Here, then, we perceive the difference between the "principles of nationalities" and the old democratic and working-class tenet as to the right
of the great European nations to separate and independent existence. The "principle of nationalities" leaves entirely untouched the great question of the right of
national existence for the historic peoples of Europe; nay if it touches it is merely to
disturb it. The principle of nationalities raises two sorts of questions: first of all,
questions of boundary between these great historic peoples; and secondly, questions as to the right to independent national existence of those numerous small
relics of peoples which, after having figured for a longer or shorter period on the
stage of history, were finally absorbed as integral portions into one or the other of
those more powerful nations whose greater vitality enabled them to overcome
greater obstacle^.'^^
The logical extension from Marx or Engels would have been to identify the Blacks of
America as a national minority or as a nationality, but not as a nation. For Marx and
Engels, the nation was a quite particular historical phenomenon:
Since the end of the Middle Ages, history has been moving towards a Europe made
up of large national states. Only such national states constitute the normal political
framework for the dominant European bourgeois class and, in addition, they are
the indispensable prerequisites . . .without which the rule of the proletariat cannot
exist.152
Engels's historicism branded the nation as an instrument of the bourgeoisie; its
emergence was concomitant to the development of a bourgeois society, a capitalist
H I S T O R I O G R A P H Y A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

215

society. And once nation and then the transnational became realized, it was possible
for an international revolutionary movement to command the society that had produced it. For Marx, both language and culture appeared to be secondary phenomena,
the first to be associated with nationality, the second, with the dominant class. Unfortunately, throughout the nineteenth century and into the next, much of the theoretical grammar brought by Marx, Engels, Lenin, and other Marxists to the analysis of
American phenomena and processes was similarly naive. It was naive because of its
ahistoricity and its tendency toward the use of aggregative concepts to the point of
superfluousness. Ultimately, its naivete was contradictory: at the historical point of
massive immigration, the application of race and class, the grammar's two most
fundamental categories, presumed the existence among the majority of American
workers of a white working class; thus the eventual appearance of a Black nation
suggested an opposite historical momentum.153Lenin proved to be the theoretical
and ideological midwife, but it was Stalin, it came to be believed in the American
Communist Party and by its historians, who had provided the theoretical basis for the
party's position that Blacks were a nation within a nation. "If there was a 'genius' in
this scheme:' Theodore Draper would declare, "it was undoubtedly Stalin."154However, the contrast between Stalin and Engels and Marx was dramatic. In what was to
be one of the most frequently cited justifications for the Comintern's "Negro program,'' Stalin had entirely forsaken analytical sophistication:
A nation is a historically established, stable community ofpeople, coming into existence on the basis of a community of language, territory, economic life, and psychological constitution, which manifest themselves in a community of culture.155

This extraordinary passage is perhaps characteristic of Stalin's theoretical contributions to Marxist thought and to world knowledge. First, it too is ahistoric, since no
contemporary nation has emerged in this way; second, it is abstract and vague,
utilizing such phrases as "psychological constitution"; third, it is tautological: community manifests itself as community; and finally, it is not Marxian, tending as it does
toward an evolutionary paradigm as opposed to that of historical materialism. Its one
apposite feature was that it was in keeping with the ideological and programmatic
opportunism that characterized Stalin's immediate predecessor. The policy implications of this passage fit quite well into the rationalizations found in "Left-Wing"
Communism. This is, perhaps, another sort of proof that the policy was a gloss on the
history of Black movements and not the independent product of the Soviet Union's
political elite. Like formulations on other national liberation struggles one discovers
in Comintern declarations, it was political opportunism searching for theoretical
justifications. It thus represented the critical importance to the Soviet Party of forming alliances with movements that were emerging from theoretically "precapitalist"
societies. Given historical necessity, Marxist-Leninism compromised itself theoretically with nationalism, and as such institutionalized the force that had brought the
Second International to its submission. It might be said in the most simple-minded

226

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

reading of the dialectic, that the Third International was a synthesis of the thesis
(socialism) and anti-thesis (national chauvinism) of the Second.
As the official policy of the American Communist Party, self-determination-the
Black Belt Thesis-would survive Stalin, but only barely. And even while Stalin was a
dominant figure in the world Communist movement, it would have its ups and
downs, responding to the national and international dynamics of the revolutionary
movement.
The policy of Negro self-determination has lived twice and died twice. After overthrowing Lovestone's "revisionism," Browder made self-determination one of the
cardinal articles of faith of his leadership. In November 1943, long after it had
ceased to show any signs of life, he delivered a funeral oration over the corpse of
self-determination; he explained that the Negro people had already exercised the
historical right of self-determination-by rejecting it. After overthrowing Browder's "revisionism," Foster made self-determination one of the cardinal articles of
faith of his leadership. In 1946 self-determination was reincarnated in a slightly
watered-down version-as a programmatic demand and not as an immediate
slogan of action.
In 1958, the Communist leadership again buried the corpse of the right of selfdetermination. It decided that the American Negro people were no longer a "stable
community"; that the Negro national question was no longer "essentially a peasant
question"; that the Negroes did not possess any distinctively "common psychological make-up"; that the main currents of Negro thought and leadership "historically, and universally at the present time" flowed toward equality with other Americans; that the American Negro people did not constitute a nation; and therefore
that the right of self-determination did not apply to them.156
Lenin had compelled the American Communist Party to take the Black American as a
critical element in its policy and organization. Stalin, himself a member of a Russian
national minority, had been the authority through which the Comintern and the
American Communist Party had come to recognize Blacks as an oppressed nation.157
And for a while the policies directly influenced by these two Bolsheviks had been
successful: thousands of Blacks came into the CPUSA during the 1930s in response to
the party's attentions and expressed intention^.'^^ However, in the background were
the UNIA and the Brotherhood. They had established the political and ideological
preconditions for the party's policies and its successes. It was the UNIA that had
embodied the Black radical tradition and primed the Black masses with a sense of
nationhood. It was the UNIA and the ABB through which many of the early Black
activists in the party had passed. And it was the UNIA and the Brotherhood that
had demonstrated the capacities of Blacks to organize politically and respond ideologically. It remains a telling point on the nature of the early American Communist movement that the significance of these examples had to depend upon Sovietdirected policy to be revealed.

HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

227

In the light of this account of Russian and Comintern intervention into the affairs
of the American Communist Party, it would appear to be a historical irony that it was
through Du Bois's work that a first reassessment of Marxian revolutionary theory was
attempted. It was Du Bois who introduced into American Marxism a critical interpretation of the nature and significance of revolution-based in large measure on the
developments of the Russian Revolution and the American Reconstruction period.
Du Bois and Radical Theory

As a Black, Du Bois was sensitive to the contradictions in American society, in
particular to the material force of racism. He was even more conscious of racism since
in his early years he had been cocooned from it. He was a young man by the time he
was forced to openly confront the culture of racism. Later, as a Black scholar, he had
had an immediate and profound experience with the false histories produced in that
culture. Both his training at Harvard with its history department largely influenced
by German historiography, and his studies in Berlin had left him with an acute
sensitivity for myth and propaganda in history. And as we have suggested earlier, as a
critic of Marx, Du Bois had possessed no obligations to Marxist or Leninist dogma,
nor to the vagaries of historical analysis and interpretation that characterized American Communist thought. Given these attributes, enveloped by the events of the postWorld War I period, Du Bois obtained the skills to seize the advantage created by this
crisis of capitalism:
[Slomebody in each era must make clear the facts with utter disregard to his own
wish and desire and belief. What we have got to know, so far as possible, are the
things that actually happened in the world. . . . [Tlhe historian has no right, posing
as scientist, to conceal or distort facts; and until we distinguish between these two
functions of the chronicler of human action, we are going to render it easy for a
muddled world out of sheer ignorance to make the same mistake ten times over.
(p. 722)
He had written these words with American historiography in mind. But we may also
assume he had an additional application at hand.
Among the several truths that Du Bois set out to establish in Black Reconstruction,
there were a number that related directly to Marxist and Leninist theory. Specifically,
his ideas concerned the emergence of capitalism; the nature of revolutionary consciousness; and the nature of revolutionary organization. As we recall, first Du Bois
would insist on the world-historical significance of American slavery in the emergence of modern capitalism and imperialism. In this, he went no further than Marx,
but this is merely where he began. Next, he would demonstrate, historically, the
revolutionary force of slave and peasant laborers-this in opposition to a reactionary
industrial working class. Finally, with Lenin in mind, Du Bois would question the
presumed roles of a vanguard and the masses in the development of revolutionary
consciousness and effective revolutionary action.
228

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

With regard to the first issue-the relationship between the destruction of slavery
and the emergence of modern capitalism and imperialism-Du Bois argued that the
American Reconstruction period was the historical moment in the developing world
system. This was the moment when world capitalism assumed the character that
would persist into the twentieth century:
The abolition of American slavery started the transportation of capital from white
to black countries where slavery prevailed, with the same tremendous and awful
consequences upon the laboring classes of the world which we see about us today.
When raw material could not be raised in a country like the United States, it could
be raised in the tropics and semi-tropics under a dictatorship of industry, commerce and manufacture and with no free farming class.
The competition of a slave-directed agriculture in the West Indies and South
America, in Africa and Asia, eventually ruined the economic efficiency of agriculture in the United States and in Europe and precipitated the modern economic
degradation of the white farmer, while it put into the hands of the owners of the
machine such a monopoly of raw material that their domination ofwhite labor was
more and more complete. (p. 48)
According to Du Bois, this was not a necessary development but the one that followed
upon the dismantling and destruction of the "dictatorship of labor" established in the
southern United States during the Reconstruction:
[Tlhere began to rise in America in 1876 a new capitalism and a new enslavement of
labor. . . .
The world wept because the exploiting group of New World masters, greed and
jealousy became so fierce that they fought for trade and markets and materials and
slaves all over the world until at last in 1914 the world flamed in war. The fantastic
structure fell, leaving grotesque Profits and Poverty, Plenty and Starvation, Empire
and Democracy, staring at each other across World Depression. (p. 634)
But rather than seeing this process as inevitable due to the contradiction between the
modes of production and the relations of production, Du Bois argued that it was
made possible by the ideologies of racism, and, to a lesser extent, individualism. It was
these ideologies as historical forces that had precluded the emergence of a powerful
labor movement in the United States-a movement whose nucleus would have consisted of the nine million ex-slave and white peasant workers of the South. The force
of these ideologies manifested itself after the war when these workers did not move to
the next logical step: the institutionalization of their historical convergence in order
to dominate the Reconstruction's "dictatorship of labor." Without this movement, the
l~~
revolution begun in 1855 with John Brown's Kansas raids could not ~ 0 n t i n u e . The
failure to achieve a consciousness of themselves as a class was not a consequence of the
absence of the concentration of production in agriculture, as some Marxists might
presume, for in the North workers had had this experience, yet their labor movement
was predominantly trade-unionist.160On the other hand, in the South, where the
H I S T O R I O G R A P H Y A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

229

character of production with regard to the concentration of labor was more ambiguous, it was these workers, Black and white, who had produced the "General Strike"
decisive in ending the Civil War.
The General Strike had not been planned or consciously organized. Instead, what
Du Bois termed a "General Strike" was the total impact on the secessionist South of a
series of actions circumstantially related to each other: some 200,000 Black workers,
most of them slaves, had become part of the Union's military forces. These, and an
even larger number of Blacks, had withdrawn their productive labor and paramilitary
services from the Confederacy, transferring a substantial portion of them to the
Union. In addition, tens of thousands of slaves and poor whites had emigrated from
the South. The former were escaping slavery, the latter their poverty and the demands
and ravages of a war in which they had no vested interest. The result was to critically
weaken the secessionists. The ordering of these diverse actions was then a consequence of the social order to which they were reactions. The contradictions within
southern society rather than a revolutionary vanguard knit these phenomena into a
historical force. After the war, a different ordering would be required to integrate
these phenomena into a political movement. This could be accomplished if only the
ruling ideologies of the society were transcended. This was not done.
[TIhe power of the Negro vote in the South was certain to go gradually toward
reform.
It was this contingency that the poor whites of all grades feared. It meant to them
a reestablishment of that subordination under Negro labor which they had suffered
during slavery. They, therefore, interposed by violence to increase the natural
antagonism between Southerners of the planter class and Northerners who represented the military dictatorship as well as capital. . . .
The efforts at reform, therefore, at first widely applauded, one by one began to
go down before a new philosophy which represented understanding between the
planters and poor whites. . . . [I]twas accompanied by. . . eagerness on the part of
the poor whites to check the demands of the Negroes by any means, and by
willingness to do the dirty work of the revolution that was coming, with its blood
and crass cruelties, its bitter words, upheaval and turmoil. This was the birth and
being of the Ku Klux Klan. (p. 623)
But it was not merely a matter of the antagonisms of the poor whites against the
Blacks being revitalized by the prominence assumed by the latter during the Reconstruction. The "deep economic foundation" for these antagonisms was in fact being
challenged by proposals to radically alter land tenure put forward by Black legislators.
Rather, it was the remnants of the southern ruling class that focused the attention of
poor whites on to the Black workers. The ruling class had been so weakened by the
war that for the first time it was forced to aggressively recruit poor whites as its allies.
"The masters feared their former slaves. . . . They lied about the Negroes. . . . They
forestalled the danger of a united Southern labor movement by appealing to the fear

230

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

and hate of white labor. . . . They encouraged them to ridicule Negroes and beat them,
kill and burn their bodies. The planters even gave the poor whites their daughters in
marriage" (p. 633).
It was in this fashion that the bond between the two elements of the southern
working class failed to materialize. By necessity, Du Bois felt, Blacks fixed class alliances with northern capitalists and petit bourgeois Radical Republicans. Both alliances were by nature short-lived. Once Northern capital had sufficiently penetrated
the southern economic sector so as to dominate its future development, it ceased to
depend on Black electorates and state legislatures responsive to Blacks and the radical
petit bourgeoisie. The alliance ended with the withdrawal of Federal troops from the
South and the destruction of the governments supported by the bureaucracy of
occupation. By the 1880s, the under-capitalized character of southern agrarian production was established and the need for external sources of raw materials more than
apparent. In Mexico, the Philippines, Haiti, the Caribbean and Pacific islands, and
elsewhere, northern capitalists constructed their own forms of slavery: but ones for
which they could not easily be held accountable or among which they would be
compelled to live.
Turning now to the question of revolutionary consciousness and organization, it is
again Du Bois's presentation of the General Strike that provides a critique of Marxist
thought. But first we should recall just what constituted Marxist theory in America at
the time.
At the time of Du Bois's writing of Black Reconstruction, Marxism came in several
forms depending on which revolutionary or intellectual tradition one considered.
Raphael Samuel has maintained that such "mutations of Marxism" were to be expected and, indeed, had been preceded by changes in Marx's own writings:161
In Russia Marxism came into existence as a critical trend within populism, in Italy
in the form of a syncretism with positivist sociology, in Austria-and Bulgaria-in
tandem with the thought of Lassalle. Second International Marxism was a heterodox affair, with numerous tendencies competing for political attention, and
nothing approaching a finished body of doctrine. Marxism was necessarily superimposed on preexisting modes of thought which it incorporated rather than displaced, and which were regarded as being intrinsic to the new outlook. . . .
The contours change radically in the period of the Third International, but
Marxism, despite its increasingly Party-minded character, was very far from being
hermetically sealed. In the 1920s there was a vigorous, indeed furious, philosophical debate within the Soviet Union itself, with rival schools contending in the name
of dialectical materia1i~m.l~~
But generally, in the order of prestige in revolutionary socialism, first were the available works of Marx and Engels and their nearest contemporaries in Europe and
These constituted the classical texts of Marxism. Second, there were the
works of the Soviet intelligentsia, Plekhanov, Lenin, Bukharin, Trotsky, and Stalin."j4

HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

231

From 1917 on, these writings became more significant to the socialist movement. With
the bureaucratization of the Russian Revolution and the institutionalization of the
Comintern, Stalin and his interpretations of Lenin's thought ultimately superseded all
other Marxist writers in authority.
All serious theoretical work ceased in the Soviet Union after collectivization.
Trotsky was driven into exile in 1929, and assassinated in 1940; Ryazanov was
stripped of his positions in 1931 and died in a labour camp in 1939; Bukharin was
silenced in 1929 and shot in 1938; Preobrazhensky was broken by 1930 and perished
in jail in 1938. Marxism was largely reduced to a memento in Russia, as Stalin's rule
reached its apogee.'65
In the United States, dichotomies reflecting the conflicts in Europe and Russia could
be found. But in America, Party propagandists were much more prominent than
independent theorists. The presence of theorists in the party had been substantially
reduced by the events of the late 1920s and early 1930s. The expulsions of a "Trotskyite" left followed by the "Lovestone" right; the spectacle of the purges of veterans of
the Russian Revolution from the Bolshevik Party; the compromises of the Popular
Front period after 1933; and the protracted demise of capitalism, had all taken their
toll, especially on revolutionary theory:
Marx's emphasis upon the historic inevitability of revolution had diminishing
importance for Party members and left intellectuals alike in the thirties. Communists may have claimed Marxism as their own, but it was merely a ceremonial claim
after the Popular Front had been announced. There were, however, few times in CP
history when Marxist theory was applied in a serious and sustained analysis of
American society. And even the non-Communist intellectual . . . made only infrequent and incomplete stabs at such ana1y~es.l~~
Revolution had been relegated to the background while more pressing needs-like
support for the New Deal; the pursuit of "collective security" for the Soviet Union; the
organization of the new unionism represented by the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO); and the fight for state assistance to the unemployed and elderlyassumed priority. Finally, though Marxism might continue to develop elsewhere
within the nexus of Communist Parties, in Europe its further elaboration in the
thirties seems to have been confined to Germany, France, and Italy. And even then, as
Perry Anderson suggests, the tradition was strained:
Astonishingly,within the entire corpus of Western Marxism, there is not one single
serious appraisal or sustained critique of the work of one major theorist by another, revealing close textual knowledge or minimal analytic care in its treatment.
At most, there are cursory aspersions or casual commendations, both equally illread and superficial. Typical examples of this mutual slovenliness are the few vague
remarks directed by Sartre at Lukacs; the scattered and anachronistic asides of
Adorno on Sartre; the virulent invective of Colletti against Marcuse; the amateur
232

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

confusion of Althusser between Gramsci and Colletti; the peremptory dismissal by
Della Volpe of A1th~sser.l~~
Still, much was in disarray.
Despite the shared premise that human emancipation was to be identical with the
achievement of the socialist revolution, the writings produced by Marxian theorists
contained serious disagreements and differences with respect to the historical processes and structural elements involved in the emergence of the revolution. Among
the areas of contention were questions regarding the nature of class consciousness;
the role of a revolutionary party; and the political nature of the peasantry and other
"precapitalist" laboring classes. Since it is impossible to even summarize the volume
of conflicting opinion to be found in Marxist literature, we will concern ourselves
with only those aspects to which Du Bois addressed h i m ~ e 1 f . l ~ ~
Marx and Engels had argued that the alienation intrinsic to the capitalist mode of
production, the contradictions arising between that mode and the social relations
accompanying it, and the extension of expropriation could result in a socialist revolution led by the industrial working classes. Though the revolution itself was not
inevitable (that would have amounted to economic determinism), the role of this
specific kind of worker in such a revolution was certain.169The historical dialectic
identified the industrial worker-the proletariat-as the negation of capitalist society;
the force produced by capitalism that could finally destroy it. Capitalism pitted one
class, the bourgeoisie, against another, the proletariat. This was the specific character
of the class struggle in capitalist society. However, since there were more than two
classes in all the nineteenth-century societies that Marx and Engels studied, it became
necessary for them to identify and assign to these other classes particular historical
roles. The petit bourgeoisie were both nominally and historically the middlemen of
capitalism: its managers, technicians, small merchants, and shopkeepers. Unlike the
bourgeoisie, the petit bourgeoisie did not own or control the means of production.
Still, it was a class whose members recognized their dependence on the bourgeoisie
for social privileges. Their political loyalties were to the bourgeoisie and as such
they were understood to be reactionary by their class-nature.I7OA fourth class, the
lumpen-proletariat, too, was reactionary. The class was characterized as one that fed
off the proletariat in a parasitic manner. The lumpen-proletariat were the thieves, the
thugs, the prostitutes, "people without a definite occupation and a stable domicile."171
It was from this class that the society recruited many of those who would form its
coercive instruments: the army, the state militias, the police. The fifth class was the
peasantry. This was the class that came closest to the poor whites and Black workers of
the antebellum period in terms of its systemic relationship to industrial capitalism, its
social organization, and its historical origins.172For Marx and Engels, the peasantry
was a remnant of the precapitalist society. But unlike other residues from feudalism,
for example, the clergy, the aristocracy, and the artisan-craftsmen, the peasantry
continued to be of importance in capitalist society. Both the peasantry and the bourgeoisie had been negations of feudalism, however the peasantry's "narrow-minded"
H I S T O R I O G R A P H Y A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

233

self-interest had been intent on destroying feudalist relations by moving historically
backward to small, individual land-holdings and away from the inclusive, nationally
integrated economic structures for which the bourgeoisie aspired. In feudalism, the
bourgeoisie had been a historically progressive contradiction, and the peasantry a
historically reactionary negation. With the destruction of feudalism by capitalist
forces, the peasantry became reactionary in a different way. The peasantry was now a
potential ally of the bourgeoisie to be poised against the political force of industrial
labor and the socialist revolution.
Lenin and Trotsky, coming from Tsarist Russia, a society dominated by a peasantsubsistence or "backward" economy, saw the peasantry differently from Marx or
Er1ge1s.l~~
In the central and western Russian countryside at the end of the nineteenth
century, the remnants of Russian "feudalism" were to be found in the aristocracy and
the poor peasantry. There were, too, the kulaks consisting of a rural bourgeoisie
supported by capitalist agriculture, and a middle peasantry essentially locked into
modified forms of subsistence agriculture. The roving peasantry, the rural proletariat,
according to Lenin, emerged from the poor peasants who worked either for the kulaks,
the landlords or some exceptional middle peasants. Both Lenin and Trotsky agreed
that the rural relations of production were subject to "internal" antagonisms of class
struggle (kulaksversuspoor peasants) and, most importantly, that the peasantry could
be an ally to the working-class movement. In 1901, for example, Lenin had observed:
Our rural laborers are still too closely connected with the peasantry, they are still
too heavily burdened with the misfortunes of the peasantry generally, to enable the
movement of rural workers to assume national significance either now or in the
immediate future. . .the whole essence of our agrarian programme is that the rural
proletariat must fight together with the rich peasantry for the abolition of the
remnants of serfdom. for the cut-off lands.174
But in 1905, after several years of recurring peasant uprisings, his view of the "rural
proletariat" was more sanguine: "We must explain to it that its interests are antagonistic to those of the bourgeois peasantry; we must call upon it to fight for the socialThough Trotsky and Lenin were opposed to the "Black Partition"
ist rev01ution.l~~
(Marx's term for the extra-legal seizure and breaking up of land into small, individual
holdings), they saw it as a tactic for momentarily attracting the peasantry to the side
of the revolution. Once the dictatorship of the proletariat was secured, other arrangements could be made for the peasants.176
Part of the reason for the judgments made by Marx or Engels of the peasantry had
to do with the conditions of work that circumscribed peasant production and the
social relations that fixed the peasants into prescribed links of exchange. Marx saw the
peasantry as a "vast mass" consisting of functional clones: simple cultivators, proximate but without significant intercourse; lacking in all but the most rudimentary
political organization or consciousness.177Engels, too, was impressed by the "great
space" that peasants occupied, and ascribed to them a tradition of submissiveness and

234

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

loyalty to particular master^."^ Neither suggested that the peasantry was capable
of independent political action. And if we compared the descriptions found in Marx
and Engels of peasant life with those of Du Bois concerning the slaves and poor
whites, we would discover striking and important similarities. Of the slave workers,
Du Bois commented:
[Blefore the war, the slave was curiously isolated; this was the policy, and the
effective policy of the slave system, which made the plantation the center of a black
group with a network of white folk around and about, who kept the slaves from
contact with each other. Of course, clandestine contact there always was; the passing of Negroes to and fro on errands; particularly the semi-freedom and mingling
in cities; and yet, the mass of slaves were curiously provincial and kept out of the
currents of information. (pp. 121-22)
In the masters' domiciles, the complexities of the relationships between labor and the
exploiters of labor many times included bonds of sentiment, but more importantly
and persistently the house servants had realized "The masters had stood between
them and a world in which they had no legal protection except the master." And that
"The masters were their source of information"(p. 123). Earlier in the work, Du Bois
had suggested, "Any mass movement under such circumstances must materialize
slowly and painfully" (p. 57). And of the poor white workers, ignored as he believed
by the American labor movement, the abolitionists, northern capitalists and southern
planters, Du Bois reckoned similarly pessimistic judgments could be made. He reiterated Francis Simkins's and Robert Woody's bleak description of their conditions:
A wretched log hut or two are the only habitations in sight. Here reside, or rather
take shelter, the miserable cultivators of the ground, or a still more destitute class
who make a precarious living by peddling "lightwood in the city. . . .
These cabins . . . are dens of filth. . . . Their faces are bedaubed with the muddy
accumulation of weeks. . . . The poor wretches seem startled when you address
them, and answer your questions cowering like culprits. (p. 26)
Du Bois added that the poor whites were also bound to the master class: "Indeed, the
natural leaders of the poor whites, the small farmer, the merchant, the professional
man, the white mechanic and slave overseer, were bound to the planters and repelled
from the slaves. . . . [TIhe only heaven that attracted them was the life of the great
Southern planter" (p. 27). Yet in the midst of the Civil War, it was these two peoples,
the Black and the white workers, who had mounted the rebellions, the "General
Strike," which had turned loose the revolutionary dynamics that Du Bois would
describe as "the most extraordinary experiments of Marxism that the world, before
the Russian revolution, had seen" (p. 358). One hundred thousand poor whites had
deserted the Confederate armies and perhaps a half million Black workers had abandoned the plantations. It was the same pattern, indeed, that would come to fruition in
Russia. Llke the American slaves and the poor whites, in the midst of war the Russian

HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

235

peasantry would desert their armies in the field. Their rebellion, too, marked the
beginnings of revolution.
Like most informed men and women of his time, Du Bois was deeply impressed by
the Russian Revolution and he believed he could write and speak of it without having
"to dogmatize with Marx or Lenin."179He had referred to what he considered a
significant element of the revolution as early as 1917 when he criticized the American
Socialist Party's ideologues for praising the successes of the Russian peasantry while
ignoring the achievements of American Blacks:
Revolution is discussed, but it is the successful revolution of white folk and not the
unsuccessful revolution of black soldiers in Texas. You do not stop to consider
whether the Russian peasant had any more to endure than the black soldiers of the
24th Infantry.1so
The processes of the Russian Revolution were a framework for his interpretation of
Reconstruction because it, too, had begun among an agrarian, peasant people. It was
a characteristic shared by all the revolutions that Du Bois linked in significance to the
American Civil War and its Reconstruction: that is, France, Spain, India, and China
(p. 708). In addition, since before his visit to the Soviet Union in 1926, he had
been cautious about the nature of class-consciousness among workers in Russia, the
United States, and elsewhere. In 1927, when he had returned from the Soviet Union,
he had written:
Does this mean that Russia has "put over" her new psychology? Not by any means.
She is trying and trying hard, but there are plenty of people in Russia who still hate
and despise the workingman's blouses and the peasant's straw shoes; and plenty of
workers who regret the passing of the free-handed Russian nobility, who miss the
splendid pageantry of the Czars and who cling doggedly to religious dogma and
superstition.181
And despite his note to the tenth chapter of Black Reconstruction, which explained
why he was not using his original title for that chapter ("The Dictatorship of the Black
Proletariat in South C a r ~ l i n a " ) , Du
' ~ ~ Bois knew the Russian Revolution was a dictatorship of the proletariat that was less democratic and less dependent upon conscious action of the workers than was to be found in the post-Civil War period in
America:
As the [Russian] workingman is today neither skilled nor intelligent to any such extent as his responsibilities demand, there is within his ranks the Communist Party,
directing the proletariat toward their future dictatorship. This is nothing new.183
And in 1938, Du Bois would declare:
When now the realities of the situation were posed to men, two radical solutions
were suddenly resorted to: Russian communism and fascism. They both did away

236

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

with democracy, and substituted oligarchic control of government and industry of
thought and action. Communism aimed at eventual democracy and even elimination ofthe state, but sought this by a dogmatic program, laid down ninety years ago
by a great thinker, but largely invalidated by nearly a century of extraordinary
social change.la4
Like Lenin, but for different reasons and in a different way, Du Bois had realized that
Marx had not anticipated the historical transformations of capitalism, specifically, the
complicating phenomena of imperialism. And caution, as well, was required in any
application of Marx to the situation of American Blacks:
It was a great loss to American Negroes that the great mind of Marx and his
extraordinary insight into industrial conditions could not have been brought to
bear at first hand upon the history of the American Negro between 1876 and the
World War. Whatever he said and did concerning the uplift of the working class
must, therefore, be modified so far as Negroes are concerned by the fact that he had
not studied at first hand their peculiar race problem here in America.185
This left a monumental gap in the analysis of capitalism and its developments, assigning Marx's own work to a specific historical period. Du Bois would conclude, while
working on Black Reconstruction, that "we can only say, as it seems to me, that the
Marxian philosophy is a true diagnosis of the situation in Europe in the middle of the
nineteenth century despite some of its logical difficultie~."~~~
In American Marxism, Lenin had largely replaced Marx as the definitive revolutionary thinker by the early 1920s. Where Marx had anticipated and depended upon
the rise of class consciousness, Lenin had posited the party in its stead. For Lenin, the
party, a small group of trained, disciplined, and professional revolutionists, constituted a necessary first stage in the development of the dictatorship of the proletariat. The party would deliberately and scientifically create the conditions for the
evolution ofworker consciousness and for socialism. Where Marx had presumed that
a bourgeois society established by a bourgeois revolution was a necessary condition
for the evolution of a conscious socialist movement. Lenin, in April of 1917, would
declare that the process had been completed in Russia in less than three months.187
Du Bois had been skeptical of Marx and Lenin on both scores. In Black Reconstruction, he reviewed the events of the American post bellum with a Hegelian sense
of the "cunning of Reason." The slaves freed themselves, Du Bois thought, not by
way of an objective consciousness of their condition but rather by the dictates of
religious myth:
The mass of slaves, even the more intelligent ones, and certainly the great group of
field hands, were in religious and hysterical fervour. This was the coming of the
Lord. This was the fulfillment of prophecy and legend. It was the Golden Dawn,
after chains of a thousand years. It was everything miraculous and perfect and
promising. (p. 122)

HISTORIOGRAPHY A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

237

And the other figures in the drama of emancipation, from Lincoln down to the poor
whites, were just as much overtaken by the unintended consequences of their actions:
Lincoln had never been an Abolitionist; he had never believed in full Negro citizenship; he had tried desperately to win the war without Negro soldiers, and he had
emancipated the slaves only on account of military necessity. (p. 153)
Freedom for the slave was the logical result of a crazy attempt to wage war in the
midst of four million black slaves, and trying the while sublimely to ignore the
interests of those slaves in the outcome of the fighting. (p. 121)
Leaders, then, led in increments. The northern field officers who put the fugitive
slaves to work did not intend to free them . . . but they did. The Confederacy moved to
preserve slavery. . . it helped to end it. Groups moved to the logic of immediate selfinterest and to historical paradox. Consciousness, when it did develop, had come later
in the process of the events. The revolution had caused the formation of revolutionary
consciousness and had not been caused by it. The revolution was spontaneous.
To the second point, the precondition of bourgeois society, Du Bois maintained
that no bourgeois society was the setting of this revolution. The dominant ideology of
the society was that of the plantocracy, a dictatorship of labor and land with no
democratic pretensions. But of more significance,the ideology of the plantocracy had
not been the ideology of the slaves. The slaves had produced their own culture and
their own consciousness by adapting the forms of the non-Black society to the conceptualizations derived from their own historical roots and social conditions. In some
instances, indeed, elements produced by the slave culture had become the dominant
ones in white southern culture. The process had spanned generations: "[TI he rolling
periods of Hebrew prophecy and biblical legend furnished inaccurate but splendid
words. The subtle folk-lore of Africa, with whimsy and parable, veiled wish and
wisdom; and above all fell the anointed chrism of the slave music, the only gift of pure
art in America" (p. 14).This was the human experience from which the rebellion rose.
Torn from it were the principles of "right and wrong, vengeance and love . . . sweet
Beauty and Truth that would serve as guideposts to the ex-slaves. It was the tradition
critical to the framing of the survival of these new people.
Du Bois, despite all the diversions and distractions of intellect, social origins, and
ambition that had marked his even then long life, had at last come to the Black radical
tradition. In the midst of the most fearsome maelstrom his age had seen, and with the
pitiable reaction of the declared revolutionary opposition in mind, his purposeful
interrogation of the past had led him to the hidden specter of Black revolutionists.
Their revolution had failed, of course. And with its failure had gone the second and
truer possibility of an American democracy. But until the writing of Black Reconstruction, the only mark on American historical consciousness left by their movement had
been a revised legend of their savagery. Du Bois had understood, finally, that this was
insufficient. "Somebody in each era," he had written, "must make clear the facts." With
that declaration, the first ledger of radical Black historiography had been filled."188
In Black Reconstruction, Du Bois had striven to enrich the critique of capitalism
238

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

and bourgeois society that had merged into the dominant strains of Western radicalism. He had no choice if he was to comprehend the crises of war and depression that
devastated the world system in his lifetime, and the rebellion and revolution in Asia,
Europe, Africa, and the New World that were their concomitants. Du Bois came to
believe that the preservation of the capitalist world system, its very expansion in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, had involved the absorption of new sources of
labor power, not by their conversion into wage labor but by coercion. Characteristically, capitalist imperialism had magnified the capacity for capital accumulation by
force variously disguised as state nationalism, benevolent colonialism, race destiny, or
the civilizing mission. Except in scattered instances, the peasantries of the Third
World had become neither urban nor rural proletariats but near-slaves. For most,
their social development had been effectively arrested. The result, relative to their own
recent pasts and the situation of European workers, was retardation. Indeed, whole
populations had been eliminated either during "pacification" or through forced labor. The belief that capitalism would advance African and Asian and other peasantries had for the most part proved to be misplaced. Beyond Western Europe, the
capitalist world system had produced social and economic chaos. No theory of history that conceptualized capitalism as a progressive historical force, qualitatively
increasing the mastery of human beings over the material bases of their existence, was
adequate to the task of making the experiences of the modern world comprehensible.
For Du Bois, America in the first half of the nineteenth century, a society in which
manufacturing and industrial capitalism had been married to slave production, had
been a microcosm of the world system. The advanced sectors of the world economy
could expand just so long as they could dominate and rationalize by brute force the
exploitation of essentially nonindustrial and agrarian labor. The expansion of American slavery in the nineteenth century was not an anachronism but a forewarning. But
so too, he believed, was its defeat.
It was also true, as Marx, Engels, and others had anticipated, that there were
contradictions to the world economy and the systems of coercion upon which it
depended. However, Du Bois came to perceive that they were not limited to the
contradictions discerned by the radical Western intelligentsia. In the long run, that is,
by the beginnings of the twentieth century, the vision of the destruction of bourgeois
society entertained by Western socialists had been shown to be of only partial relevance. The working classes of Europe and America had indeed mounted militant
assaults on their ruling classes. But in defeat they had also displayed their vulnerabilities to bourgeois nationalism and racialist sentiment. Elsewhere other realities
had too come to the fore. The shocks to Western imperialism, which in the previous
century had appeared to European radicals to be at the margins of the world revolution, were by the 1930s occupying center stage. The Indian Mutiny, the Boxer Rebellion, the nationalist struggles that had erupted in the Sudan, Algeria, Morocco,
Somalia, Abyssinia, West and southern Africa, and carried over into the twentieth
century-the "people's warsn-had achieved major historical significance in the revolutions in Mexico, China, and Russia. And in every instance, peasants and agrarian
H I S T O R I O G R A P H Y A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

239

workers had been the primary social bases of rebellion and revolution. Nowhere, not
even in Russia, where a rebellious urban proletariat was a fraction of the mobilized
working classes, had a bourgeois social order formed a precondition for revolutionary struggle. Revolutionary consciousness had formed in the process of antiimperialist and nationalist struggles, and the beginnings of resistance had often been
initiated by ideological constructions remote from the proletarian consciousness that
was a presumption of Marx's theory of revolution. The idiom of revolutionary consciousness had been historical and cultural rather than the "mirror of production."
The oppositions that had struck most deeply at capitalist domination and imperialism had been those formed outside the logic of bourgeois hegemony. In Black Reconstruction, Du Bois had tried to give these processes a concrete, historical appearance.
Again he had had very little choice in the matter. The ideology of the Black struggle,
the revolutionary consciousness of the slaves, had appeared to his Westernized eyes,
part legend, part whimsy, part art. Yet he realized it had been sufficient to arouse them
into mass resistance and had provided them with a vision of the world they preferred.
Their collective action had achieved the force of a historical antilogic to racism,
slavery, and capitalism.

240

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

constitutions became a bar to good government. The new free populations could
never by "represented" under existing conditions. Thus the idea took root that the
West Indies should be persuaded to reconsider their constitutions and become
crown colonies.
By 1875 all the Caribbean colonies except Barbados (to which might be added the
Bahamas and Bermuda) agreed to give up their old constitutions and become
Crown colonies. In 1868 the colonial secretary announced that the new legislative
councils would all have a basic feature: "that the power of the Crown in the
Legislature, if pressed to its extreme limit, would avail to overcome every resistance
that could be made at it." In other words, the British government had stepped into
the West Indies to protect the population from the power of the former slaveowning class.3
The alternative, as was demonstrated by the Black rebellion in Jamaica in 1865, was to
suffer the colonial oligarchy's inadvertent but constant encouragement to violent
Black militan~y.~
This, we may surmise, was an unacceptable political risk to the
architects and guardians of the Empire whose over-extended charge had already
absorbed the disastrous mutiny in the Indian sepoy army in 1857 (and the subsequent
occupation of India by British troop^),^ and was as well a senior and chartered
member in the European "scramble" for Africa and Asia. Neither the English people
themselves nor the masses of imperial subjects could be expected to perpetually
accede to the imperial myth of civilizing in the face of the overtly selfish and catastrophic preoccupations of white settler colonists.
For the Black peasants and workers in the British West Indies, however, the "new
imperialism" that displaced the Caribbean oligarchy was by far the more formidable
enemy. While government power in the British home isles ricocheted between the
Liberal and Conservative parties, as it had after the Reform Bills of 1867 and 1884,
while state policy staggered between "free trade, free production, the freedom of
nationalities" (that is, home rule for the Irish and Welsh), and anti-imperialism6 and
the alternative of aggressive, jingoistic imperialism, popular support for a global
British presence was measurably inconstant. Even a Select Committee of the House of
Commons, as early as 1865 had "recommended that most British colonies should be
An
given up as soon as possible and that they should be prepared for independen~e."~
industrialized Britain was then more than a match for its European rivals and its
domestic economy reflected its international domination of commerce. But in the last
decades of the nineteenth century, "Britain was and knew herself to be threatened by
'empires.' Sandwiched between the diplomatic and mercantile momenta of Germany, France, Russia, and the United States, overdrawn by financial scandal and
mismanagement, the weakened British economy and a restive public encouraged and
compelled the imperialist faction that, until then, could only pursue its vision with
restraint. Even the final liberal government of the nineteenth century (1892-95) was
overwhelmed by the imperialist ethos9 By the fateful Conservative victory in 1895,

242

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

imperialism had come to dominate the public mind. With its offer of new markets for
a diminished trade, new lands for British settlement, with its new nationalistic "halfpenny" press and its imperialist literati and intelligentsia,1° the imperialism of the
businessman's Parliament, masked as national interest and destiny, seemed to fulfill
the wildest fancy:
No doubt [in 18911 the population of Great Britain barely exceeded 38,ooo,ooo,
but there were nearly 2,000,000 British subjects in Cape Colony and Natal, over
600,000 in New Zealand, over 3,000,000 in Australia, and 5,000,000 in Canada.
Add to these figures the Indian subjects of Great Britain, almost 300,000,000, and a
further 46,000,ooo in the remaining territories under some form of British rule or
influence and the total amounted to 394,600,ooo. What other State could hope to
rival such a figure. . . . The area of the Empire was also on the increase: in
September 1896, a statesman calculated that in twelve years 2,600,000 square miles
had been added to it-that is to say twenty-four times the area of Great Britain. In
1895, it was 11,335,000 square miles. A few more annexations and it would amount
to a quarter of the entire land surface of the globe.
This was the object which the convinced imperialists deliberately pursued."
For another two generations, the lives of the West Indian masses and those of other
colonial subjects would be directly affected by representatives of a ruling class bathed
by its self-manufactured glory and whose monumental conceit hid from it the source
and scale of the horrors with which it would be associated. As if to satisfy Marx's
contempt and add to Engels's class humiliation, the English bourgeoisie and its
European confederates sank into the historical swamp of pretentious imperialism and
counter-preening nationalisms from which the carnivore of global warfare disgorged.
Reckless provocations, diplomatic inanition (followed by its military genus) and
intoxications with empire inexorably led the ruling classes of Europe to that destruction of their means of production and their labor forces that they signified with the
name "World War."
In Trinidad, during the seven-plus decades between the formal abolition of slavery
in the British possessions and the slaughter of a generation in the early twentieth
century, the massive withdrawal of labor from the plantations by the Africans and
Creoles12 had led to some dramatic countermoves on the part of the sugar estates
companies and the planters.13 With the moral pretensions of the abolitionists still
resonating in public discourse, the former owners of Black labor resorted to pseudoCalvinist rhetoric to elicit support from Parliament for their next exercise in the
exploitation of labor. Their leading spokesman, William Burnley, lamented
the paucity of the labouring population, which prevents competition among them;
and they are enabled to make more money than is good and advantageous for them
which I consider to be the great cause why, instead of advancing in moral improvement, they are rather retrograding at the present period; for I hold that it is

C . L. R . JAMES A N D THE BLACK RADICAL T R A D I T I O N

243

impossible for any moral improvement to take place in a community where the
want of a good character and a good reputation interpose no serious obstacle to a
man gaining a lucrative employment.14
New immigrants, they all agreed, would be necessary. The competition of immigrant
labor would discipline Trinidad's Black workers to reasonable wages and regular
hours of labor. This would, in turn, make it possible for British sugar producers to
undermine the slave sugar of their foreign competitors in the European market. "Free
Trade, after all, meant the free movement of men as well as of goods."15
There were three possible sources of immigrant labor that were immediately at
hand: the other islands of the West Indies; the free Negroes of the United States; and
the Africans liberated by the Royal Navy from "illegal" slave ships along the West
African coast. None of these sources, however, proved sufficient. Although an estimated 10,278 West Indians immigrated to Trinidad between 1839 and 1849 (in the
same period another 7,582 went to British Guiana), and between 1841 and 1861,3,581
liberated Africans from Sierra Leone and St. Helena arrived, and an even smaller
number of free Blacks made their way from Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and New York, the lure of Trinidad's sugar fields was shortlived, the sources
of immigration too irregular.16 Somewhat tardily, indeed, following the leads of
Parliament, the East India Company and the planters of British Guiana, the Trinidadian ruling class and its metropole partners turned their attention to India.17For the
next 70 years, from 1845 to 1917, Indian indentured labor became the basis for the
sugar plantations of western Trinidad.18 "Indians, both indentured and free, had
become the backbone of Trinidad's plantation labor force by about 1860."19
About 143,000 Indians came to Trinidad up to 1917. Immigration began in 1845;
there was a break in 1848-51; then from 1851 right down to 1917 Indians arrived
steadily each year. Between 1845 and 1892, 93,569 labourers came, channelled
through two main Indian ports, Calcutta in the North, and Madras in the South.
The great majority, however, came from Calcutta and after 1872 there were no more
arrivals from Madras.20
They were, for the most part, peasants from the northeast of India, the United
Provinces (now Uttar Pradesh), and Bihar, and amounted to a mere fraction of the
hundreds of thousands of Indians who abandoned the region in the nineteenth
century's last decades to find their ways to the West Indies, Fiji, Natal, and Nepal.
This area, the seat of ancient cultures, was overpopulated and economically depressed in the later part of the nineteenth century. The extreme heat in the summer, the floods in the monsoon leading to whole-scale destruction of crops, and
the recurrent famines made life difficult under the British rule. Rural indebtedness was appalling and agriculture was "by no means an easy business by which to
make a living." Moreover, the Mutiny-cum-Revolt of 1857 had a disastrous socioeconomic effect on this region.21

244

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

Propelled by these circumstances into the far extremities of the British colonial system, they brought with them their culture: their languages, their castes, their music,
and their religions.22And up to the First World War, it came to be accepted that they
served in Trinidad as a "substantial counterpoise against troubles with the negroes
and vice versa."23 "Coolie" labor, to be sure, had provided momentary succor for
sugar production. And Trinidad's economy, diversified by cocoa production and, in
the last decades of the nineteenth century, oil and asphalt i n d ~ s t r i e srode
, ~ ~ above the
depression that visited the other West Indian monocultures in the last quarter of that
century. But a deeper social process was occurring, one beneath the apparent antipathy between "coolie" and Creole. Where they were thrown together, the existential
vice of labor was drawing East and West Indian into certain cultural approximations:
In 1865 a fierce riot over precedence broke out between the Indians of Woodford
Lodge and Endeavour Estate at Chaguanas. Creoles and Chinese went to the help of
their workmates; loyalties to the estate transcended those of race in the fighting. . . .
Rowdy elements among the Creoles were joining in the Hosein celebrations in
the 1850s. For them it was like Donnybrook Fair where people went in the hope of a
fight. But also Negroes began to take a more respectable part in the procession as
drummers for which they were paid in rum or cash, and, as in Mauritius in the
i8jos, the taziyas were sometimes borne by Negroes.25
The significance of these events should have been clear, but the whites were deceived
. ~ ~ error was of strategic proportions in a
by their discourse of d o m i n a t i ~ n That
society that by the opening decades of the next century was 4 percent white, 15 percent
mulatto, 1 percent Chinese, and 80 percent of African and East Indian origins and
descent.27
The dead season of collective resistance in Trinidad, the time up to the earliest years
of the twentieth century, was both real and partially imagined. Because "the Creole
population had nearly all withdrawn from the estates,"28it was certainly not until they
were drawn as workers to the docks, the railways, and public works, and to the oil
fields and asphalt works that they would obtain an effective cause and objective
circumstance to openly challenge the crown and the white minority. Meanwhile, they
claimed their liberation in other ways:
Black labourers in Trinidad, during this period, reacted to the oppressive society
they lived in by attempting to reduce their dependence on the plantation, by
seeking to create an area of freedom for themselves, however limited. They tried to
become peasants or artisans; if they failed, they drifted to the towns. In the towns,
constant urban unrest reflected an awareness of oppression. The bands fought each
other because they were unable to attack the real sources of their misery or powerlessness, not because they were unaware of them.29
Thus the ideologic and phatic ingredients of the radical tradition of the slaves was
preserved by the African Creoles (who were augmented by the liberated Africans) in

C . L. R . IAMES A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

245

their culture: their language, the patois "not understood by most policeman, magistrates, and official^";^^ their profane festivals such as Canboulay and the jamet Carnival where thinly veiled disregard for Anglican and Catholic moralities abound; in
their syncretistic religious sects and noisy wakes; in their music and dance.31These
evoked hostility and disgust among the Anglicized colored classes, shocked the upperclass whites, and inspired discomfort in official Trinidad. In 1868, obeah was outlawed;
in 1883, drum dances (Calenda, Belaire, Bongo) were prohibited as "immoral"; in
1884 and 1895, the festivals or aspects of them (band stick-fighting, the wearing of
masks) were suppressed. In time, too, it was believed and expected, public primary
education would eradicate "Creole." But the verse of Calypso suggested the spirit of
liberation, the sense of dignity was unextinguishable. There one found a quiet but
steeled expression of outrage.
Can't beat me drum
In my own, my native land.
Can't have we Carnival
In my own, my native land.
Can't have we Bacchanal
In my own, my native land.
In my own, native land.
In me own native land,
Moen pasca dancer, common moen ~ i e 1 . ~ ~
Indian indentured workers, who had now assumed the economic role of the slaves
(and in the eyes of many, white and Creole, their status as
were understandably somewhat distant from collective resistance. Within 20 years of the arrival of the
first 225 Indians on the Fate1 Rozack in 1845, according to Donald Wood, their semisegregated communities and villages had quite successfully begun the replication
of much of the social striation of the subcontinent: vast chasms had been opened between the prosperous who had obtained land, shops, or managed to become moneylenders, and the "coolie" masses.34Within 20 more years, in several hundred villages
woven around sugar and their own industries of wet rice, maize, and peas,35the
blanket of their transferred society muffled their response to being cheated, abused,
extorted, and exploited by white and countryman alike. Periodically there were labor
strikes on the estates (a series of them occurred in the 1880s),but the initial expression
of Indian consciousness was liberal rather than resistant.36Chinese workers, their
importation abortively curtailed to less than 2,500 in total, racially melted into one or
other of the Black populations or acquired their independence through crafts, the
cultivation and marketing of garden vegetables, or further migratiom3'
For the whites, particularly the more numerous and culturally dominant "French
Cre~les:'~~
the crown, its governor, its colonial administration, and its Legislative
Council were an annoyance. Elective representation would have been preferable, but
the provision of an abundant supply of cheap labor in Indian immigration had largely
calmed their concerns about the crown colony system. Still, the "birds of passage,"
246

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

that is the colonial officials and their families, were extended status among the upper
classes in deference to their positions. For the most part, neither their culture in the
national sense and in its amount, nor their education or descent qualified them for
acceptance otherwise.
The governing power was, of course, "North European"; and the superstructure of
government, law, and education derived from Britain. But there was an important
elite group which cherished ideas and values which were Latin and French rather
than Anglo-Saxon. White Creoles of French and Spanish descent outnumbered the
English Creoles and British residents, and were almost certainly more influential in
setting the tone of the society.39
And not until the aristocratic French Creoles were thoroughly Anglicized and substantially displaced by British capital and British upper-class families in the late
nineteenth century was there any possibility of a whole-hearted reception in that
quarter. The British faction (primarily English and Scottish), which during the decline of French Creole sugar fortunes in the mid-century had for a time sought to
forcibly Anglicize and subordinate the "foreign" Creoles, had been subdued since
They were content to leave the settling
Governor Gordon's regime in the late 1860s.~~
in of the white hierarchy to time.41 But despite their differences, the white elite
held the line on two matters. The first involved representative government. The elite
would raise this issue on those occasions when their more aggressive ambitions were
thwarted by the crown's executive or by the British Parliament. The Water Riot of 1903
and the troubles simultaneous to the First World War were just such occasions.42The
second was the colored and Black middle classes, a presence increasingly difficult to
ignore. They "represented a greater threat to continued white control of the society
[than the black and Indian masses], even though their numbers were relatively few;
they held the key to the political and social future of Trinidad, and some far-seeing
Trinidadians realised it."43
Only the colored and Black middle classes, whose development had been in a sense
interrupted only to build up to a crescendo in the last quarter of the nineteenth
century, were as a class unassuaged by Trinidad's prosperity and uncomfortable in the
island's catacomb of class and racial relations.
[Tlhe coloured and black middle class consisted of two distinct groups. There was
a small group of families of mixed African and European descent who were the
descendants of the French free people of colour settled in Trinidad since the 1780s.
Secondly, there were the people, both black and coloured, who can be described as
"self-made." They were the descendants of the Trinidad ex-slaves, or of "Liberated"
African immigrants, or of immigrants from the eastern Caribbean. And they had
acquired their middle-class status mainly through their command of British culture and their white-collar jobs.44
The second of the colored classes, having come into being while Trinidad was under a
British colonial order, was never allowed to obtain the prominence of the Romains,
C . L . R . JAMES A N D T H E B L A C K R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

247

Philips, Angernons, Montrichards, Maresses, and the Beaubruns of the first (which P.
G. L. Borde, the French Creole historian, had described as having "formed a second
society parallel to the first; and no less distinguished than it").45In British Trinidad,
the colored and Black middle classes had fallen from their previous heights, ceasing to
be able to claim a share in the island's upper classes:
Probably a majority of educated black and coloured men in this period were civil
servants. With commerce virtually closed to them, teaching, the professions, and
the service offered the only viable alternatives, except for the relatively small number of coloured planters. Only a small minority could hope to obtain the university
education essential for law or medicine. This left employment in the service,
including teaching in the government schools, as the only source of acceptable
white-collar jobs.46
The distribution of privilege and advantage in a racially determinant society frustrated their larger vision: the achievement of equality with the white oligarchy, the
acquisition of power. Like their counterparts among Black petit bourgeoisie elsewhere, they resented the arbitration to which the belief in Black inferiority assigned
them.
A correspondent to the Telegraph wrote that no amount of wealth or education enabled a man in Trinidad to enjoy social prestige, if he lacked "the correct tinge."
Planters ofwealth, merit, and character were "tabooed:' being without the 'colonial
passport' . . . more potent than education, habits, principles, behaviour, wealth,
talent, or even genius itself. People outside the West Indies had no idea of the actual
position of the educated man "of the incorrect tinge." It was especially galling when
coloured men of "good" family were subjected to dis~rimination.~~
And so, though it had not been necessary to respond to Anthony Trollope when in
1859 he published his anti-Black tome, The West Indies and the Spanish Main, by
1888 when Froude's The English in the West Indies appeared, a challenge from the
newer elements of the middle class was i m p e r a t i ~ eInterestingly
.~~
enough it came
from a Black and not a colored representative, and was fundamentally radical. Jacob
in his Froudacity: West Indian Fables Explained, set before his readers a
broader canvas than the "childish insults of the blacks" with which Froude had been
intellectually satisfied:
The intra-African negro is clearly powerless to struggle successfully against personal enslavement, annexation, or volunteer (or fight for) protection of his territory. What we ask, will in the coming ages be the opinion and attitudes of the extraAfricans: ten millions in the Western hemisphere, dispersed so widely over the
surface of the globe, apt apprentices in every conceivable department of civilised
culture. Will these men remain for ever too poor, too isolated from one another,
for grand racial combination, or will the naturally opulent cradle of their people,

248

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

too long a place of violence and unholy greed, become at length the sacred watchword of a generation willing and able to conquer or perish under its i n ~ p i r a t i o n . ~ ~
Thomas, whose parents had been slaves only a few years before his birth, who had
himself grown up and taught in the pathetically inadequate little country schools that
had been distributed by the government among the rural Black masses, and whose
command of the patois had resulted in his writing Creole Grammar in 1869, spoke not
for the middle class. He rejected their ambition and the master from which it was
copied. The middle classes, however, could not reject him. He was the most important Black intellectual in Trinidad during his lifetime. His "efforts were important to
the coloured and black middle class, for they seemed to show that this group was
more cultured than the dominant whites, who were dismissed as being crassly materialistic. Thomas' literary activities indicated that non-whites were the cultural leade r ~ . And
" ~ ~though the majority of the colored and Black middle classes were pained
to lever their lives, their families and their reputations away from association with the
Black masses, a few Black men of letters, like Samuel Carter and Joseph Lewis (the
editors of New Era), William Herbert (editor of Trinidad Press, and then Trinidad Colonist), H. A. Nurse (George Padmore's father), and the barrister Henry Sylvester Williams, achieved, respectively, closer approximations to Thomas's comprehen~ion.~*
Williams, of course, the primary initiator of the Pan-African Conference
that convened in London in July 1900, came closest.53He chose to realize Thomas's
ideal. He and Thomas, along with other explicitly political figures in the colored and
Black middle classes (Henry Alcazar, Edgar Maresse-Smith, and C. Prudhomme
David) active in the official affairs of Trinidad, tentatively began the radicalization of
the island's public discourse. It was, however, a second thrust of the middle classes
that set the tone and lent that discourse a particular character.
The society arranged by these generations of the colored and Black middle classes
of Trinidad was a chiaroscuro of the white upper classes. Its priorities had little to do
. ~their
~
with the elements of the radical tradition sounded in Thomas's F r o ~ d a c i t yIn
society, the shadings of privilege and status, acceptability and tolerance, the play
etiquette of Brown upon Black were as subtle a social art as could be devised with the
cultural, historical, political, educational, familial, and financial materials in their
hands. One almost had to be a Trinidadian, one with a special intuition at that, to
know what was required and expected, what indeed were the possibilities for any of
their young launching into the orbit of adult intercourse. While the white elite
seemed to possess the convenience of bold denominational distinctions, the more
easily measured amassed acreage or fortune, and the property of names that could be
located in the historical traditions frankly elaborated in Trinidadian literature and
journalism, the standard deviations among the colored and Black middle classes were
many times of such tiny gradation that an instinctive social subtlety was a sine qua
non. Gross disparities, to be sure existed, but they occurred too infrequently for
custom or habit to be unerring guides. In any case, the highly esteemed place of

C . L . R. JAMES A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

249

the light-complexioned elite was easily enough achieved over a generation or two.
Though its value was not appreciably lessened by "mixed marriages, simple color
was considered a crude and rude measure at best. Any Black aspirant sufficiently
talented, ambitious, or sponsored by professional training or family affluence could
ensure hidher grandchildren would be phenotypically eligible for the pinnacle of
intra-class recognition. There was though the ceiling beyond which the Black could
not rise. Anticipating that closure, many of the Blacks, particularly the intelligentsia,
sought to substitute education and literature as currency in the inter-class exchange.
Where Thomas had succeeded, others naturally strove, hoping to draw the legitimizing attentions of white and colored alike and thereby rolling aside the stone of caste
for themselves and hopefully for their children. The highest coin, as was the case
among the Victorian English intelligentsia itself, was literature. It was the mark of the
educated Black:
Probably because education was so important in their rise in status, the members
of this group attached great weight to cultural and intellectual life. They boasted of
their command of British culture, their ability to speak and write "good" English,
their interest in things of the mind. It was literacy, familiarity with books, the
possession of "culture" which mattered, as well as an occupation which involved no
manual labour. These things were more essential criteria for membership of the
middle class than wealth or lightness of skin. . . . In one sense they formed an
intelligentsia, in that they took pride in being the most cultured sector of the
community, although they were not part of the ruling class.
They attached so much importance to culture because they had no other valuable and valued possession to hold on to. . . .
It is not surprising, therefore, that members of the coloured and black middle
class often took the lead in literary or intellectual a~tivities.~~
In journalism and literary criticism they grew to be supreme, outdistancing the
whites in their celebration and message of the most advanced social ideas, literary
forms, and preoccupations available to an English-speakingpublic. Thus, when it was
their turn to articulate a challenge to colonialism and racial domination, their superior education and intellect were both their rationale and their
They were,
indeed, the basis for the nationalism that C. L. R. James exhibited in his first political
work, The Casefor West-Indian SelfGovernment:
On his arrival in the West Indies [the colonial official] experiences a shock. Here is
a thoroughly civilised community, wearing the same clothes that he does, speaking
no other language but his own, with its best men as good as, and only too often,
better than himself. What is the effect on the colonial Englishman when he recognises, as he has to recognise, the quality of those over whom he is placed in
authority? Men have to justify themselves, and he falls heavily back on the "ability
of the Anglo-Saxon to govern," "the trusteeship of the mother country until such

150

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

time" (always in the distant future) "as these colonies can stand by themselves,"
etc., e t ~ . ~ ~
For a community such as ours, where, although there is race prejudice, there is no
race antagonism, where the people have reached their present level in wealth,
education, and general culture, the Crown Colony system of government has no
place. It was useful in its day, but that day is now over. It is a fraud, because it is
based on assumptions of superiority which have no foundation in fact. Admirable
as are their gifts in this direction, yet administrative capacity is not the monopoly
of the English; and even if it were, charity begins at home, especially in these
difficult times.58
The Black Victorian
Becomes a BlackJacobin

Cyril Lionel Robert James was born in Trinidad in 1901, "the son of a Black Trinidadian school teacher, grandson just over half a century after the abolition of slavery of a
sugar-estate pan boiler and an engine driver."59His earliest years were in Tunapuna, a
village of 3,000 by his account, situated half way between the capital at Port of Spain
to the west and Arima to the east. It had been along the road between Port of Spain
In
and Arima that the ex-slaves had founded many of their new villages in the 1840s.~~
the valleys around Tunapuna, "liberated" Africans had settled, planting their gardens
in the hillsides, and 30 years later, in the 1870%it was one of the sites where the
dancing and fighting bands with their territorial and semisecret codes had proliferated. Tunapuna had "boasted gangs called Sweet Evening Bells, Tiepins, Greyhounds,
Island builder^."^^ As a child in a slightly more respectable Tunapuna, James recalls
that he had quite early begun to absorb much of the survival ethic that had attached
itself to the Black middle class of which he was a part:
I was about six years of age when I got hold of my mother's copy of Shakespeare.
There were 37 plays in it, or 36, and there was an illustration in the front of each
play. The illustration had below it the Act and the Scene which it illustrated and I
remember the illustration before Julius Caesar saying, "How ill this taper burns."
Now I could not read a play of Shakespeare but I remember perfectly looking up
the Act and Scenes stated at the foot of the illustration and reading that particular
scene. I am quite sure that before I was seven I had read all those scenes.62
Notwithstanding the availability of adventure stories in his mother's library, the child's
reading was hardly what Richard Small described as "the normal youth's interest."
Jameswas being trained in and was exhibiting the lessons ofhis class. In that prescribed
inventory there was contained also the Puritan importance of class propriety:
I was fascinated by the calypso singers and the sometimes ribald ditties they sang in
their tents during carnival time. But, like many of the black middle class, to my

C . L. R. JAMES A N D T H E B L A C K R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

2.51

mother a calypso was a matter for ne'er-do-wells and at best the common people.
1 was made to understand that the road to the calypso tent was the road to
hell, and there were always plenty of examples of hell's inhabitants to whom she
could point.63
The sexual and moral customs of the Black lower classes, for all their vitality and
attractiveness, amounted to a rejection of English bourgeois sensibility, they were an
affront to the morality of the colonial model set before the natives. Unquestionably, in
a Black family that knew the rules, this implicitly political statement had no place in the
future of a properly instructed young Black man. "Good" society, white, Black, and
colored, conspired against what it interpreted as Dionysian, Satanic humors. Cricket,
however, was lionized in the culture of James's class. Indeed, from all indications, its
presence pervaded every strata of Trinidadian society. Richard Small reported:
The membership of the various clubs was determined by occupation and social
class and at that time, even more sharply than now, that discrimination would be
virtually the same as differentiation according to color. Queens Park Club, the
controllers of cricket in the island, were white and wealthy; Shamrock, Catholic
French Creole traders and cocoa planters; Maple, middle class of brown skin;
Shannon, the Black middle class version, white collar office types, and teachers; and
then Stingo, the tradesman, artisan, worker. . . . Add to that that almost everybody
played or took an interest in cricket and that it was played for up to eight months of
the year, and some estimate of its potential for social and sublimated social expression will be grasped.64
Cricket was James's father's game, his uncle Cuffie's and Aunt Judith's game, his
cousin Cudjoe's game; an interest even to be found in his grandfather, the extraordinary Josh Rudder. It was a game of the English school boy. "Recreation meant cricket,
for in those days, except for infrequent athletic sports meetings, cricket was the only
game. Our house was superbly situated, exactly behind the wicket."65For James, then,
it was a natural obsession; one to which he would turn as he sought to make his way in
the adult world; and one to which he would return when he sought to make comprehensible his life and the colonial world in which he was raised.
The Trinidad of James's young life was already showing signs of popular agitation.
In 1897, following the models of the English Workingmen's Association of the 1830s
and the Leeds Workingmen's Parliamentary Reform Association organized in 1861,
the Trinidad Workingmen's Association was founded. With a membership of 50
skilled and unskilled workers, which included Black carpenters, masons, tailors, and
at least one pharmacist and one chemist, it was, according to Brinsley Samaroo, the
first such organization in the British West Indies:
[TIhe Trinidad body emerged as one concerned with both trade union and political pressure group functions. It was founded just before the visit of the 1897 Royal
Commission, sent to the British West Indies to examine the seriousness of the sugar
depression and to recommend measures for bringing relief to the colonies. The
252

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

Association's first president, Walter Mills, a pharmacist, gave evidence before the
Commission. . . . Mills complained against the insanitary conditions of the colony's
towns, dwellings and estates . . . press[ed] for a reduction in taxes, especially on
foodstuffs and agricultural implements used by the labouring people . . . better
transport facilities, the setting up of minor industries, the introduction of Savings
Banks and the further opening of Crown Lands. In addition, the Association was
strongly opposed to state-aided Indian immigration which, Mills claimed, increased the competition for the "starvation wages paid on sugar estates." . . . Above
all, Mills said, the colony should be granted elective g ~ v e r n m e n t . ~ ~
The Association soon lapsed only to be reactivated, affiliating itself in 1906 with the
new British Labour Party.67Now with hundreds of members, it began to function as a
representative of the working classes, campaigning for labor reform and agitating for
shorter working hours, sick leave, and against the "color bar," expanding its membership by attracting the "traditionally apolitical" East Indian worker. The colonial
government was unsurprisingly hostile, advising the Colonial Office of the Association's dubious character:
Its members, some of whom are of but doubtful reputation, are for the most
part not workingmen, and have no stake in the colony. They have adopted their
title simply with the object of securing recognition by the English Labour Party
and thus obtaining for themselves an importance that they would not otherwise
possess.68
But Europe and the colonial governments of the British and French empires were
soon caught up in the First World War. It would prove to be a historical force from
which the empires would never recover. The war itself, over and above the toll it
exacted in Europe (but not entirely European), was a fundamental contradiction to
the raison d'etre of the British Empire: the assumption was that "the defence of the
self-governing colonies from external attack and the maintenance of sea-power were
During the war, India alone with 1% million men and
British resp~nsibilities."~~
women in British uniforms of one sort or another supplied more troops than all the
other dominions and colonies (Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa were
dominions) together.70And what India had done for Britain, Africa did for France:
"Over 545,000 African native soldiers," wrote George Padmore, "were employed by
France, chiefly as shock troops in stemming the tide of the German advance during
the most critical periods of the war."71Tens of thousands of Africans also served with
Germany, Belgium, and British forces in East Africa, while from the United States, of
the 342,277 Black troops who served, 200,000 fought with the French army, uniformed as French soldiers.72From the West Indies, troops were also mobilized, most
of them, some 20,000, serving in the British West India Regiment. However, there had
been problems. For some, certain considerations overrode loyalty to Britain:
In Trinidad the press used the term "better class" to describe the whites and the
lighter-complexioned mulattos who constituted the merchant and planter class. In
C . L. R . JAMES A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

2S3

Barbados the term used was "the best class." When enlistment of recruits started in
1915 the "better class" young men throughout the British West Indies refused to
join, except as officers, in the same contingents as the black soldiers. Arthur Andrew Cipriani, a Corsican creole who was leading the campaign for recruits complained that "our better class young men are shirking" from joining the public
contingents "because of the lamentable question of colour which lies at the bottom
of everything in these parts." . . . Some "better class" soldiers came to London and
joined British regiments, the majority joined with "better class" soldiers in the
other colonies to form the Merchants' and Planters' C ~ n t i n g e n t . ~ ~
But the advent of the Great War had brought to the fore a more considerable and
mean enemy of colonial interests:
[Nlot everyone was prepared to make sacrifices for the general good. The colony's
merchants saw the start of the war in Europe as a signal for an immediate increase
in prices. On the very day of the government's announcement that the war had
started in Europe, The Port of Spain Gazette reported that prices had risen steeply.74
This inflation of prices broke the backs of the Black working class in the island's cash
economy, and was the primary cause of the strikes that followed: oil workers struck in
1917, railworkers, scavengers, stevedores, sweepers, sugar, and dock workers in 1919,
asphalt and railworkers again in 1 9 2 0 . ~
And
~ the Trinidad Workingmen's Association,
joined after the war by returning ex-soldiers enraged over the racial discrimination
they had experienced in military service,76was at the center of the agitation. This was
the basis of the social force that Captain Cipriani, returning from the same war,
would lead into the Trinidad Labour Party in 1932:
Contact with Europe during the first World War gave West Indian radicals a firsthand opportunity to learn from Europe and so the postwar period was increasingly
"Socialist" in the way that West Indians understood the term. Cipriani wore a red
button on his lapel and many of his followers wore red shirts in imitation of the
"Reds" of the Bolshevik revolution of 1917.~~
In these years, Trinidad had become a part of the postwar Black movement that
within twenty or so years would pull all the empires apart:
[Jlust as the 1914-18 war saw the Indian nationalists make great strides, so there
were important stirrings elsewhere. In 1915, riots in central Ceylon led an alarmist
governor to proclaim martial law and to imprison many notable Sinhalese. They
included Don Stephen Senanayake (later the first prime minister), who never quite
forgave the British. In 1918 the Ceylon National Congress was formed following the
Indian precedent. In the same year as the Ceylon riots an abortive rising in Nyasaland, led by the Rev. John Chilembwe, demonstrated the growing passion of African nationalism. . . .
In West Africa the Indian nationalists had eager admirers. When India was
invited to the War Cabinet in 1917 they cried: "Why not West Africa as well?" As
2S4

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

India and the Dominions were invited to the peace conference in 1919, Dr. NankaBruce of the Gold Coast sent resolutions to the western powers so that "the voice of
West Africa" could also be heard at Versailles. The first [sic] Pan-African Congress
met in Paris in 1919. . . .
At the same time in Kenya the Kikuyu began to organize political associations.
Lives were lost in Nairobi riots in 1922. . . . Similarly, a few political movements
were growing in the West Indies, such as the "Representative Government Association" of Grenada, founded in 1914, and Captain Cipriani's "Trinidad Workingmen's
Association:' which flourished at the end of the war. Marcus Garvey of Jamaica
founded the Negro nationalist "Universal Negro Improvement Association," which
had brief international fame at the end of the war.78
James, however, though he was aware of these events, kept his distance. "In politics I
took little interest."79He had finished school in 1918 and was content to tend his two
passions, his two disciplines: cricket and literature.
I had a circle of friends (most of them white) with whom I exchanged ideas, books,
records and manuscripts. We published local magazines and gave lectures or wrote
articles on Wordsworth, the English Drama, and Poetry as a Criticism of Life. We
lived according to the tenets of Matthew Arnold, spreading sweetness and light and
the best that has been thought and said in the world. . . . Never losing sight of my
plan to go abroad and write, I studied and practiced assiduously the art of fiction.80
He had, to be sure, made choices, political choices, with which he would find it
increasinglydifficult to live as the forces of the world bore down on him and the Black
radical tradition acquired its revolutionary form. Still, his earliest direction was in
contrast to that of Malcolm Nurse, his childhood playmate.81Nurse, matriculating at
the Roman Catholic College of Immaculate Conception and the private Pamphylian
High School, also graduated in 1918. For a few years, he, as did James, would work as a
reporter (for the Weekly Guardian). In 1925, he would emigrate to the United States,
and within two years of his arrival he would join the American Communist Party. It
was then that Nurse would become George Padmore. But even before leaving Trinidad, he had developed an open antagonism to imperialism. The Guardian had provided him with an object:
The job bored him, there was no scope for thoughtful writing and he detested his
editor, Edward J. Partridge, an Englishman who demanded subservience from his
black staff. When Partridge died, Nurse wrote that he had been "one of the most
arrogant agents of British Imperialism I have ever encountered. I held him in utter
contempt, and had hoped to use my pen in exposing his role before the colonial
workers and peasants whom he oppressed through his dirty sheet the G ~ a r d i a n . " ~ ~
James and Padmore would meet in London in 1932.~~
By then James would have just
become a Trotskyist, and Padmore was barely a year from the end of his work with the
Communist movement.84Their political collaboration would begin in 1935.
C . L. R. JAMES A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

255

While still in Trinidad, James had taught in school, played cricket (for Maple), and
worked as a part-time reporter. As a Black journalist on the island in the early 1920s,
he witnessed the maturing of nationalist politics under Cipriani. Richard Small,
however, suggests that: "It was not until 1924 that James started paying anything like
close attention to [Cipriani's] speeches and not till 1931that he became a follower of
C i ~ r i a n i . "It~was
~ his conversation in 1923 with Learie Constantine, the cricketer, that
had unnerved him, and, perhaps begun the process:
I was holding forth about some example of low West Indian cricket morals when
Constantine grew grave with an almost aggressive expression on his face.
"You have it all wrong, you know," he said coldly.
"What did I have all wrong?
"You have it all wrong. You believe all that you read in those books. They are no
better than we."
I floundered around. I hadn't intended to say that they were better than we. Yet a
great deal of what I had been saying was just that.
Constantine reverted to an old theme.
"I have told you that we won that match. We won it."
The conversation broke up, leaving me somewhat bewildered.
"They are no better than we." I knew we were man for man as good as anybody. I
had known that since my schooldays. But if that were the truth, it was not the
whole
James's politics like those of Cipriani, however, remained within the parameters of
parliamentarianism. He would need Marxism, he maintained later, to break with that
a s s ~ m p t i o nBy
. ~ the
~ late 1920s he was a nationalist, but though he had read Garvey's
Negro World, had interviewed Garvey himself when the latter visited Trinidad after
his expulsion from the United States, and was also familiar with some of Du Bois's
early works, James's vision had still only partially progressed beyond the ideological
tradition in which he had been reared: "I hadn't really the faintest idea about Black
politics then, nor was there any talk about any African or Black revolt."88His commitment was to fiction writing, an intent that had born some fruit in the publication of
some of his short stories, and the development of the manuscript for what would
become Minty Alley.89 Nevertheless, his political apprenticeship had begun and he
was preparing to write a biography of Cipriani:
I began to study the history of the islands. I collected Hansards, old White Papers,
reports of Royal Commissions. There were plenty around which nobody wanted. It
was all very simple and straightforward. For background I had the Whig interpretation of history and the declarations of the British Labour Party. For foreground there were the black masses, the brown professional and clerical middle
classes, the Europeans and local whites, Stingo and Shannon, Maple and Queen's
Park. My hitherto vague ideas of freedom crystallized around a political conviction: we should be free to govern ourselves.90
156

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

It was then that Constantine, the more disruptive political force in James's social
milieu, intervened. Constantine wanted to write a book, one which from his experience of playing cricket in England since 1929 might express his insights into the game
and English society. He invited James to England to collaborate with him on the
project. In March of 1932, James left for England. He would not return to Trinidad for
26 years.91
British Socialism

The socialist traditions in the British metropole to which Anglophone Blacks of
Africa and the Caribbean were exposed differed decidedly from those of their Francophone and American counterparts. For one, the history of the development of socialist movements and socialist thought in Britain had been marked by unique historical
events: the formation of the first significant industrial working class; the defeat of the
revolutionary and then the parliamentary reform (Charter) movements in the early
nineteenth century; British domination of international capital and trade during
most of the century; the ambiguous presence of Marx and Engels in Britain from the
mid-nineteenth century until their deaths in 1883 and 1895, respectively; the founding
of the First International in 1864; the appearance of the new British Empire, and the
concomitant intensification of Anglo-Saxonism as a national ideology. One of the
historical consequences of these several events was the persistence into the twentieth
century of a working-class movement with strong trade unionist sympathies:
[In 18951 the total membership of the unions of the United Kingdom, including
those which were not represented at the Congress [of British Trade Unions that
year], was estimated at one and a half million-that is, say, about a fifth of the entire
number of adult male workers. There was nothing like it in any other great nation.
Moreover, an estimate of the strength of the working class not confined to a general
view of the country as a whole, but distinguishing between the different districts
and branches of the national industry yielded even more striking results. . . . In
Lancashire, Durham, and Northumberland the trade unions contained at least a
tenth of the entire population, and half the adult male workers. It would be true to
say that for the Lancashire cotton spinner or weaver, the miner in Durham or
Northumberland, membership of a trade union was in practice compulsory.
Indeed the size of this army of workmen was perhaps the best security that the
unions would pursue a prudent policy. In a highly civilized country there are not a
million or a million and a half revolutionaries; and of the British unions, about the
year 1895, the most conservative and cautious were precisely those whose membership included the largest proportion of the men employed in the trade.92
This impulse was joined by the formation of specifically political and electoral arms
of the socialist movement: the Independent Labour Party (founded in 1893) and the
Labour Party (circa 1900). Together, the trade unions and the parliamentary parties
had a decisive effect on worker militancy:
C . L. R. JAMES A N D T H E B L A C K R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

257

While there is evidence to suggest a degree of working-class mistrust of the state in
its everyday forms, the British labour movement had tended to insert both its
industrial and political activities within the existing national political structure; in
Gramscian terms it lacked a sufficiently hegemonic perspective to challenge the
central institutions of state power.93
Finally, English nationalism or Anglo-Saxonism, so powerful an ideological phenomenon during the last quarter of the nineteenth century, to some extent insulated
British socialists from a ready acceptance or submission to socialist currents originating from the ~ontinent.9~
The political and ideological impacts of organizations like
the Marxian Henry Hyndman's Social Democratic Federation (1883),which exhibited
its founder's hostility to trade uni~nism,'~
William Morris's "patrician" Socialist
League (1885), and the Socialist Labour Party (c.1900) inspired by the visionary
American intellectual Daniel DeLeon, were of only indirect significance.
Prior to 1917 there were only two Marxist organisations of any consequence. These
were the British Socialist Party (B.S.P.) and the Socialist Labour Party (S.L.P.).
The B.S.P. was the direct descendant of the Social Democratic Federation (S.D.F.)
founded in 1883 under the leadership of Hyndman, having been formed in 1911as a
coalition of the S.D.F., sections of the non-Marxist I.L.P., the Clarion movement
and various local socialist societies. The membership of the S.D.F. during the
nineteenth century never exceeded 4,000; the B.S.P.'s initial nominal membership
of 40,000 declined to no more than a third that number by the outbreak of war,
and active membership was considerably less. The S.L.P. had split away from the
S.D.F. at the turn of the century. It was purer in doctrine and correspondingly
much smaller; the membership never exceeded a thousand, the majority concentrated in S ~ o t l a n d . ~ ~
More well-known (and affluent) was the Fabian Society (Sidney and Beatrice Webb,
George Bernard Shaw, Annie Besant, Graham Wallas, Sydney Olivier, G. D. H. Cole,
and Margaret Cole) whose tendencies were broad enough to encompass imperialism,
state socialism, and anarchy.97Their mark would be more enduring in British
thought, not the least for their establishment of the London School of economic^.^^
But it was "Labour Socialism," the anti-Marxist, reformist, ethical, and pragmatic
resolution to the class war, that directed the policies of the British trade unions and
the Labour Party, and to which British workers mostly attended:
By their very nature the rank and file-the men and women who bought and sold
literature rather than wrote it, and listened to speeches rather than gave themproduced very little material of their own. We need to know more of these anonymous men and women who swelled the ranks of the trades councils, constituency
parties and I.L.P. branches up and down the country. But such testimony as we do
have, supplemented by the local Labour press and other historical records, testifies
to the pervasive influence of Labour Socialism. Particular phrases such as "a higher
social consciousness," "the social organism," "the Socialist Commonwealth," "let us
258

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

call to the man with the muck-rake,'' "ballot boxes and not bullets:' etc. are encountered r e ~ e a t e d l y . ~ ~
When eventually, after the Russian Revolution and the founding of the Communist
Party of Great Britain (CPGB),
an "uncompromisingly" revolutionary Marxist party
appeared, it was still the case that very little success would accrue to Marxism among
the working classes. As Neal Wood maintains: "British communism has to a great
extent been shaped by its development in the shadow of what has become the largest
and most powerful Social Democratic Party in the world." Much of the history of the
CPGB and its differences from Communist parties elsewhere can perhaps be explained
by the gargantuan strength and effectiveness of the Labour Party.lo0And neither the
postwar economic decline of the 1920s nor even the Depression, coming on the heels
of the party's fiasco in the General Strike of 1926,1°' could salvage the CPGB as a mass
party.lo2
For the most part, then, following the Depression, English Marxism became a
creature more of the sons and daughters of the middle and upper-middle classes than
of English workers. Massive unemployment in their ranks, the emergence of fascist
movements in Europe, a decade of the display of the corruption and incompetence of
"bourgeois democracy," and the spectacular achievements of the Russian Revolution,
had worked their magic:
Changes in the intellectual life of a nation can often be perceived at an early date
among university students. Prior to the nineteen-thirties British students had never
exhibited the political fervor so characteristic on the continent. Consequently, it
must have been with some satisfaction that Karl Radek was able to announce to the
Congress of Soviet Writers in 1934 that "In the heart of bourgeois England, in
Oxford, where the sons of the bourgeoisie receive their final polish, we observe the
crystallization of a group which sees salvation only together with the proletariat."
The beginning of an unprecedented political ferment took place in 1931, when
embryonic communist organizations were established at London and Cambridge
Universities by students returning from Germany. . . . A Marxist Society saw the
light of day at the London School of Economics in 1931, and the radical Cosmopolitan Society replaced the old International Society. Oxford's notorious October Club, founded in January 1932, was banned in November of the following year,
ostensibly for its criticism of the Officers' Training Corps.lo3
Nevertheless, class arrogance, bitter divisions between workers and the class of the
intelligentsia,lo4the residues of xenophobia (so central in the earlier century to the
role of Irish workers in the British working-class movement and later as a support for
imperialism), all worked against the possibility of the British Communist movement
becoming a dominant force among the country's proletariat. Indeed, counterforces to
the CPGB and Bolshevism had already developed in the 1920s among British workers
with the emergence of "the Plebs League, the National Guilds League, sections of the
I.L.P., the Workers' Socialist Federation (W.S.F.) and the South Wales Socialist Society
C . L. R. JAMES A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

259

(S.W.S.S.)."Lo"y the 193os, British Marxism-the intellectual and moral residue of
British Communism-had achieved its most enduring influences among university
intellectual^;^^^ and British socialism had been transformed into an electoral phenomenon with the Labour Party and the ILP as its most significant manifestations.lo7
Black Radicals in the Metropole

During these same years, the British Empire's African and Caribbean subjects were
not frequent visitors to the metropole. In actuality, they had much less access to
Britain than their Francophone counterparts had to the European continent. Nevertheless, African merchants were frequent visitors to London, and in time Black
students from the emerging middle classes or sponsored by missionary societies
found their way to the British Isles.lo8Still, many of the figures who would emerge as
important ideologues, theorists, and activists in the anti-imperialist movements in
the British colonies after World War I and World War 11, were forced to take rather
circuitous routes before arriving in Britain. Padmore, like Azikiwe of Nigeria, Nkrumah of the Gold Coast, and P. K. I. Seme of South Africa, came to Britain from the
United States. With its tradition of Black colleges and universities, America was a
much more hospitable and accessible route to further education, but experience in
the metropole was still important. T. Ras Makonnen (George T. N. Griffith) came to
Britain via America and Denmark. A few others, like Johnstone (Jomo) Kenyatta of
Kenya, spent a number of penurious years in the metropole and on the Continent
caught between colonial officialdom, missionary networks of limited resources, and
rather haphazard e m p l ~ y m e n t . 'The
~ ~ administrators of British colonialism, as we
have seen, particularly in those colonies where European settlement had occurred,
were generally hostile to natives acquiring Western education outside the auspices of
the missionary schools or much beyond an elementary level. Some Blacks in both the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries did make it to Britain for advanced training
or to further pursue professional careers. Usually the sons of the fledgling colonial
middle classes found all over the Empire, they remained within the margins of what
was expected of them. Among them, however, were such figures as Henry Sylvester
Williams (Trinidad), already discussed, Harold Moody (Jamaica), T. R. Makonnen
(British Guiana), Mohamed Ali Duse (Egypt), and James-all of whom would play
prominent roles in Black politics in Britain but who traveled to Britain with at least
professional interests in mind. Once there, these experienced some changes of minds,
augmenting their original intents or entirely devoting themselves to Black liberation.
Among their achievements in Britain would be the establishment of newspapers like
Mohamed Ali Duse's African Times and Orient Review (where Marcus Garvey received his first introduction to Pan-Africanism);l10such publishing presses as Makonnen's Pan-African Publishing Company; and the founding of a series of social and
political organizations: the Afro-West Indian Literary Society (igoo), the Ethiopian
Progressive Association (1906), the Union of Students of African Descent (1917), the
West African Students Union (1925),and the League of Coloured Peoples (1931)."'
260

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

During the interim between the world wars, a few members of the colonial Black
intelligentsia working in Britain were closely associated with Marxist or Communist
movements. Padmore, prominent in the Third International until 1933, was to head
the Red International of Labour Unions' (the RILU or Profintern) International Trade
Union Committee of Negro Workers (ITUC-NW);
Rajani Palme Dutt, an English-born
Eurasian who studied at Oxford, would become the leading theoretician of the CPGB
for 40 years; Peter Blackman, a Barbadian who had worked in West Africa as a
missionary, would become a prominent spokesman and journalist for the CPGB (he
had been preceded by two other Barbadians, Chris Jones of the Colonial Seamen's
Association, and Arnold Ward); Shapurji Saklatvala, a physician born in Bombay, was
one of the first two Communists standing for Parliament to be elected, he represented
North Battersea in 1922; and, of course, James was to be well-known as a writer and
speaker for the Trotskyist movement.112Left politicians, such as Willie Gallacher, the
Communist MP,Fenner Brockway and Rev. Reginald Sorenson among the left wing of
the Labour Party (and in Brockway's instance, the Independent Labour Party), and
the independent Reginald Reynolds, were all associates of the radical faction of this
Black intelligentsia in Britain.lL3But just as some events, like the worldwide depression of the late 1920s and i93os, would propel some members of this intelligentsia
toward the left, others caused them to seriously question the commitment of European radicals, and particularly European Communists, to their causes. In the early
and middle i93os, two such events, the Third International's disbanding of the International Trade Union Committee of Negro Workers in 1933, and the press revelation
of the Soviet Union's trade with Italy in war materials during the Italo-Ethiopian War
(in contravention to League of Nations sanctions),ll4proved to be critical. In Britain,
the most radical Black activists generally turned toward Pan-Africanism as the form
of their political work while retaining aspects of Marxism for their critique of capitalism and imperialism.
In these early decades of the century, as had been the case for most of the previous
century, the significance of the metropole for colonial Black intelligentsias was their
interest in preparing for a role in, and for some a share of, the Empire. Others-for
instance tribal authorities or missionaries-might appear in London seeking official
relief from this or that manifestation of greed or injustice on the parts of colonial
administrators or settlers. But for the ambitious, this was entirely a waste ofthe seat of
Empire. For them, as James would testify of his own arrival in Britain, it was often a
case of the "British intellectual going to Britain."lI5 Many, of course, returned to their
colonial homelands-particularly those from West Africa and the more populous
islands of the Caribbean-but quite a few remained in England for the rest of their
lives. And as the century proceeded, their numbers were substantially, if intermittently, augmented by the arrivals of Blacks with peasant and urban working-class
backgrounds, propelled toward the metropole by the more chaotic forces that catalyzed or were the results of the crises in the world system: that is, wars and labor
~hortages."~
Finally, a smaller number of these Blacks, but certainly the most prominent, came to the Western metropoles to pursue careers in sport and entertainment,
C . L . R . J A M E S A N D THE B L A C K R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

261

careers that would be certainly delimited if not entirely proscribed in their native
ground.'17 In some part, members of the Black intelligentsia resident in Britain acted
as a mediation for Black labor in the metropole and the colonies. As doctors, like
Peter Milliard (British Guiana), they tended to the needs of the Black and white
working classes in the industrial ghettos; as barristers, like H. S. Williams and Learie
Constantine, they often acted in the interests of colonial appellants, or were active in
civil and welfare rights.l18 Others, such as Makonnen in Manchester, and Samuel
Opoba ("Sam Okoh") and "Joka" in Liverpool, established restaurants and dance
clubs for colonial students, seamen, and immigrant workers, Black and white. Still
others, like Edward G. Sankey, later a Nigerian businessman, acted as scribes and
personal counselor^."^ Britain was at "the centre of gravity."120It was the source of
authority for the Empire, the highest seat of appeal from the sometimes arbitrary
ravages of colonial policy and authority. It was the site so persistently and idyllicly
envisioned in the literary and historical texts employed in the "colony of schools" that
ringed the Empire, and where they could extend their intellectual and professional
attainments and anticipate being permitted to come into their rightful heritage.
England was, in short, the natural setting for this British, if Black, middle class,
frustrated at home as so many of them were by their recognition of the "two Englands-the England of the colonies and that of the metropolis."121 The first, they
knew, was constricted by the castelike boundaries of racialist order; the second, they
believed, was fair-minded and a virtual meritocracy.
Only a few among them came to Britain for explicitly political purposes. Makonnen and Padmore did, but such others as Williams their predecessor and James their
contemporary, acquired those purposes while living in Britain. Together, they helped
to constitute that generation of Black intellectuals that-at their historical juncturepresumed or perhaps understood that the project of anti-imperialism had to be
centered in the metropole. After their time and because of their work, decolonization
and Black liberation would return to their native lands.
Makonnen had first come to Britain in 1935. He returned two years later and took up
residence for 20 years. He was a Pan-Africanist when he arrived and remained so, deserving to be ranked along with Du Bois, Kwame Nkrumah, and Padmore in that
movement. Indeed, he was more responsible than anyone else for bringing the movement together at Manchester in 1945 for the Fifth Pan-African Congress-the last time
many of them would meet as ideologues without power.122As a publisher, Makonnen
had been the first to publish Eric Williams's work and had published some of the writings of Kenyatta and Padmore as well.123For Makonnen, who had lived for a time in the
United States, the center ofthe British Empire was a most significant platform. He celebrated the contrast between its liberalism and that of his own society in British Guiana.
It did not take him long to come to the beliefthat colonial radicals could depend upon
British traditions of free speech and a free press in their attack on the Empire.
What was it like to be a black man in the Britain of the 1930s?Certainly we were not
rich; far from it. But we were generally happy in our lot-just to know that we were
262

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

challenging one ofthe greatest empires in the world. Imagine what it meant to us to
go to Hyde Park to speak to a race of people who were considered our masters, and
tell them right out what we felt about their empire and about them . . . write any
tract we wanted to; make terrible speeches; all this when you knew very well that
back in the colonies even to say "God is love" might get the authorities after you!124
Persistently anti-Communist throughout his life, a man who could and did beseech
his brothers: "If you are interested in communism, then buy the book. . . . Don't join
the club!"125Makonnen could still appreciate the "leveling" in British political life that
minimized national groups and negated "the Negro Problem" that he had experienced as so prevalent in America.
The few West Indians, West Africans or Somalis who worked in the ports or in
London were certainly living under terrible conditions but these were not different
from those of the Welsh miner, or the appalling area of the Glasgow slums. . . .
[W]e were able to see the worker, the struggle of the proletariat much more clearly
than across the A t l a n t i ~ . ' ~ ~
More important to him, the same sort of solidarity was true of Blacks. Because Blacks
were so few in Britain, he believed, kinship overrode class. Unlike America where a
pretentious urban Black middle class had become alienated from the majority of
working-class Blacks, those in pre-World War I1 Britain formed a responsive fraternity. When in England some of them became disoriented and went "shenzi," "instead
of being disgraced we would provide money to pay for their passage [home]."'27
Harold Moody's League of Coloured People and various members of the radical Left
were also a part of this services network. The most central characteristic of England
for Makonnen, however, seemed a result of imperial inadvertence. While in Britain
the ruling classes commanded the society by virtue of a certain hegemonic grace, in
the colonies the more brutal machinery of domination persisted. Those Blacks who
made the journey between these two polarities could never be the same:
[Wlhen you look at the results of those Africans who had been to England, you
wouldn't be far wrong in saying that England had been the executioner of its own
colonial empire. In the sense that she had allowed these blacks to feel the contrast
between freedom in the metropolis and slavery in the c01onies.l~~
Padmore, it seems, despite his vigorous opposition to British imperialism, shared
Makonnen's enthusiasm for the metropole. He was also impressed by the liberal
traditions of what he had learned as a Marxist to identify as "bourgeois democracy."
The same man, we are told, who in 1931 detailed the exploitation, "Bloody deeds:' and
"hypocripsy" of the Empire in Africa and the West Indies (in his The Lije and
Struggles of Negro Toilers), was also capable of exclaiming to Makonnen in nearreckless admiration:
[Tlhe security people, they know we are here; they come into our offices pretending to be buying books or magazines, and sometimes when we're returning from a
C . L. R. JAMES A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

163

trip to Russia, they hold us back after crossing the Channel. But you can joke with
them and say, "We've just been across to get some Russian gold, and we're coming
back to enrich the old country." Instead of giving you the American cattle-prod
treatment, they laugh it off.lZ9
Of course, it was all delusion. There was, in the 193os, little that was quaint or
liberal about British politics or generous about the British state. While it was true that
in a small niche of British society the Popular Front and its Third International allies
flourished, that radical writers and artists could produce political and literary journals such as Storm, Cambridge Left, Left, the Left Review, New Verse, and others, that
such weeklies as The Tribune or Claud Cockburn's The Week could be published, that
the Left Book Club could be organized, and drama groups like Unity Theatre and the
Group Theatre could perform, that mass mobilizations like the unemployed of the
Jarrow Crusade (1936) could demonstrate, and thousands volunteer for the Spanish
Civil War's International Brigade (some 2,762 were thought to have gone to Spain,
1,762 wounded, 543 killed),130it was also true that power in British society was being
employed for other things. In the streets, Sir Oswald Mosley's tens of thousands of
British Union Fascists exacted a terrible physical toll on antifascists, and destroyed
shops like those in London's Mile End Road owned by Jews.'" Julian Symons recalled:
"Certainly the police force, never notably sympathetic towards Left-wing movements,
seemed always to assume very readily the task of protecting the Fascists from opposit i ~ n . " But
' ~ ~ the official faces of British politics were no less venal. In 1936, at its
Edinburgh conference, the Labour Party had "turned its back on the needs of republican Spain,"133and even earlier the National Government embarked on a "neutralist"
course between fascist states and their victims.134Yet the same state had no pretensions toward neutrality where its Empire was concerned. Black activists in Britain in
the 1930s were subject to the same "heavy mannersn-as West Indians would say-as
their predecessors. Just as in the 1920s, Mohamed Ali Duse had been "constantly
trailed" by MI5, by Scotland Yard, and agents of the Colonial Office,135and Claude
McKay, listed in the files of the British Secret Service, was prevented from returning to
Jamaica decades after his single year (1919-21) of radical journalism in England,136
British Intelligence and the Colonial Office had taken note of Padmore (as early as
1931) and proceeded to neutralize his work in Africa.13' In the Caribbean, particularly
during the workers' strikes of 1937-38, Black activism was ruthlessly suppressed. And
when the Second World War followed, many of these "subversives" were duly interned.'18 But the delusion of liberalism of which Makonnen and Padmore spoke was
also self-delusion, a piece of a larger misconception. To them and many of their
fellows, England, the second England, the meritocratic England of romance novels
and Whig histories, was the embodiment of fair play and deep moral regulation. It
was an ideal, then, that even the most committed anti-imperialists among them
found difficult to shake. Not even the gross imperfections and racism they confronted
in the metropole dissuaded them. It was as though they had come to accept that as

264

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

Black Englishmen a part of their political mission was to correct the errant motherland. Of all of them, it was James who would come closest to understanding why this
was so. Doubtlessly it was his comprehension of English society that provided him
with insight into British imperialism, British liberalism, and the British Left. On this
score, he would proceed far beyond the economism of Engels, Marx, and many of the
most recent British mar xi st^.'^^
Perhaps one reason for James's less euphoric reaction to English society was that
his introduction to the country had differed in important ways from those of Makonnen and Padmore. Living in Lancashire with Learie and Norma Constantine, physically remote from the more typical sites of middle-class radicalism and organized
politics, James was enveloped by a more contemplative work and a more mundane
politics. Through Constantine, to be sure, he had gained access to the Manchester
Guardian and was soon substituting for Neville Cardus, the paper's cricket correspondent. But his major preoccupations: the collaboration with Constantine on
Cricket and I, the public lectures on the West Indies, the editing of The Life of Captain
Cipriani, provided him the opportunity to read Lenin, Stalin, and Trotsky, to review
the lie of labor politics in Britain, and to meet with British workers for discussions
removed from super-heated circumstances. Indeed, he would later admit that the
development of his critical stance regarding the Labour Party (with which he had
identified as a "Ciprianian" nationalist) was due to discussions with Lancashire workers that brought discredit on the Party's leadership: "My Labour and Socialist ideas
had been got from books and were rather abstract. These humorously cynical working men were a revelation and brought me down to earth."140Apparently sharing their
disillusionment with the Labour Party, he soon found an alternative:
I read the History of the Russian Revolution [Trotsky] because I was very much
interested in history and the book seemed to offer some analysis of modern society.
At the end of reading the book, Spring 1934, I became a Trotskyist-in my mind,
and later joined. It was clear in my mind that I was not going to be a Stalinist.141
It was from this political base and ideology that he would write World Revolution:
1917-1936. The Rise and Fall of the Communist International in 1937, and translate

It was as a Trotskyist that James would author The
Boris Souvarine's Stalin in 1938.'~~
Black Jacobins, the work for which he is best known. First published in 1938, this still
formidable study of the Haitian and French revolutions and their signification for
British abolitionism, was at one and the same time an analysis of the relationship
between revolutionary masses and leadership, and an attempt to establish the historical legacy of African revolutionary struggles. Within the same volume it is not difficult to unearth a critique of Stalinism, an expression of Trotsky's concept of permanent revolution, and the elaboration of Lenin's theory of the dictatorship of the
proletariat-all constructed upon Marx's extraordinary determination of the primitive, that is, the imperialist accumulation of capital. It was from the beginning recognized as an extraordinary work. We will return to it shortly.

C . L . R . JAMES A N D T H E B L A C K R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

I65

However, it was a second turn of consciousness that provided James with a perspective on English society. That development is recounted in Beyond a Boundary,
James's most exquisite statement on British imperialism and the development of
English bourgeois society. Published in 1963, it was a sort of autobiographic studySylvia Wynter has called it an "autosociographical ~ystem~~~-ostensibly
of the game
of cricket. Here James excavated his entrance into English society as a proper member
of the English middle class, steeped in the public school code. His memory of being a
Black boy at Queen's Royal College in Trinidad characterized the bourgeois morality
and rationalism to which he and his fellow colonials were introduced:
[Ilnside the classrooms the code had little success. Sneaking was taboo, but we lied
and cheated without any sense of shame. I know I did. . . .
But as soon as we stepped on to the cricket or football field, more particularly the
cricket field, all was changed. . . . [W]e learned to obey the umpire's decision
without question, however irrational it was. We learned to play with the team,
which meant subordinating your personal inclinations, and even interests, to the
good of the whole. We kept a stiff upper lip in that we did not complain about illfortune. We did not denounce failure, but "Well tried" or "Hard l u c k came easily
to our lips. We were generous to opponents and congratulated them on victories,
even when we knew they did not deserve it. . . . On the playing field we did what
ought to be done.144
Cricket, he writes, became one of his obsessions. He played it, he read about it, and in
time as we have noted he came to write about it. In a way, his youth was dominated by
the game; cricket was the means of his introduction to the island's Brown middle
class; it selected his personal friends; it grounded his perceptions of manhood and the
judgments he would make of other men; and eventually, through Constantine, it
became the reason for his coming to England. His other obsession was literature.
This, too, was an emanation of the English bourgeoisie. For James, it had begun with
William Makepeace Thackeray: "I laughed without satiety at Thackeray's constant
jokes and sneers and gibes at the aristocracy and at people in high places. Thackeray,
not Marx, bears the heaviest responsibility for me."145
After Thackeray there was Dickens, George Eliot and the whole bunch of English
novelists. Followed the poets in Matthew Arnold's selections, Shelley, Keats and
Byron; Milton and Spenser. . . . I discovered criticism: Hazlitt, Lamb and Coleridge,
Saintsbury and Gosse. . . . Burke led me to the speeches: Canning, Lord Brougham,
John Bright.146
But the two-cricket and English literature-were complements. Each of them, as he
was to discover in England, were cultural and ideological expressions of the same
social order, a bourgeois order grounded on capitalism, systematized in the nineteenth century by Thomas Arnold's philosophy of the public school, tutored by the
moral persuasions of Thomas Hughes, and embodied in the play of W. G. Grace, the
cricketer.147The game and its place in the social history of England told it all:
266

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

It was created by the yeoman farmer, the gamekeeper, the potter, the tinker, the
Nottingham coal-miner, the Yorkshire factory hand. These artisans made it, men
of hand and eye. Rich and idle young noblemen and some substantial city people
contributed money, organization and prestige.
The class of the population that seems to have contributed least was the class
destined to appropriate the game and convert it into a national institution. This
was the solid Victorian middle class. It was accumulating wealth. It had won its first
political victory in the Reform Bill of 1832 and it would win its second with the
Repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. It was on its way. More than most newcomers it
was raw. . . . The Victorian middle classes read Dickens, loved Dickens, worshipped
Dickens as few writers have been before or since. It is a very bold assumption that
they did not understand what Dickens was saying. . . . Dickens saw Victorian
England always with the eyes of a pre-Victorian. His ideal England was the England
of Hazlitt and of Pickwick. Man of genius as he was, the Victorians were more perspicacious than he. They were not looking backwards. They wanted a culture, a
way of life of their own. They found it symbolized for them in the work of the
three men, first in Thomas Arnold, the famous headmaster of Rugby, secondly in
Thomas Hughes, the author of Tom Brown's Schooldays, and lastly in W. G. Grace.
These three men, more than all others, created Victorianism, and to leave out
Grace is to misconceive the other two.148
Cricket and football as organized games had begun as expressions of the "artistic
instincts" of the English rural and artisan classes. Had James had available to him
what E. P. Thompson was concurrently formulating in The Making of the English
Working Class (what might be mistaken for coincidence if one were not aware that
both James and Thompson were Marxist historians; both were responding to a recent
experience of profound political disillusionment; for James, his defeat at the hands of
Eric Williams upon his return to Trinidad,149for Thompson, his resignation from a
British Communist Party he reckoned morally and politically comatosed by Stalinism;lS0and both were, in Thompson's words, "attempting to defend, re-examine and
extend the Marxist tradition at a time of political and theoretical disaster"),lS1he
would have had no reason to hesitate in assigning this emergence of organized games
to the process of working-class formation in England. These games, more particularly
their organization and their preindustrial spirit "untainted by any serious corruption,'' were one aspect of the cultural mediation constructed by the working classes as
a response to the historical processes of capitalist dislocation, expropriation, and a
deepening alienation. James, however, could only hint a comprehension of that signification: "[Wlhen the common people were not at work, one thing they wanted was
organized sports and games."152The reflexive logic of his own development drew his
attention elsewhere. He focused his analysis on what the games came to signify for the
ruling classes, the classes whose capacities for literary and philosophical articulation
had done so much to form his own consciousness.
For James, the starting point for understanding the English ruling classes and their
C . L. R. JAMES A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

267

hegemony over the laboring classes at home and abroad was in the historical parallel
he discovered between ancient Greece and nineteenth- and twentieth-century Imperial Britain. It was a natural place for him to begin, he was British and "Greco-Roman
we are."153In both societies, he recognized a relationship that fused power and organized games; an almost fanatical obsession with athletics, cemented (as he wrote of
the Greeks) to the assertion of "the national unity of Greek civilization and the consciousness of themselves as separate from the barbarians who surrounded them."154
The first recorded date in European history is 776 B.c., the date of the first Olympic
Games. The Greek states made unceasing war against one another. But when the
four-yearly games approached they declared a national truce, the various competitors assembled at Olympia, the games were held and when these were over the wars
began again. . . . To every Greek city and every colony (as far away as Italy, Sicily,
Africa, Egypt and Marseilles) the envoys went from Olympia with the invitations,
and the communities sent their representatives and their official deputations. Forty
thousand pilgrims would assemble, including the most distinguished members of
Greek ~ 0 c i e t y . l ~ ~
But, James insisted, the whole spectacle and its apparent but deceptive parallel in
British society required closer analysis. Such an inspection would reveal the subtle
dialectic between culture and the exercise of domination:
The games were not introduced into Greece by the popular democracy. In fact,
when the democracy came into power it lifted another type of celebration [the
tragic drama] to a position of eminence to which the games soon took second
place.
The Olympic Games had been a festival of the feudal aristocracy and the bourgeoisie of Greece. Only the bourgeoisie had the money to stand the expense of the
competitors. . . . Only the aristocratic families were in a position to take part in the
chariot races.156
In England, organized sport had been a mass phenomenon, a spontaneous and public
creation. And then, just as with land and labor, the rising bourgeoisie had expropriated it for their own purposes. Undisciplined, vulgar, and lacking self-~onfidence,l5~
they had sensed that their reliance on naked force in their personae as expropriators,
exploiters, and imperialists would ultimately destroy them if they could not establish
to their own satisfaction their right to rule: "They wanted a culture, a way of life of
their own."
Arnold believed in religion and he believed in character. Scarcely less powerful in
his conceptions was the role of the intellect. . . . The English ruling classes accepted
Arnold's aims and accepted also his methods in general. But with an unerring
instinct they separated from it the cultivation of the intellect and substituted for it
organized games, with cricket at the heart of the curriculum.158

268

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

The public school and its regimen of organized games and athleticism provided them
with a way of life. John Rae, himself a headmaster, concurs:
Athleticism was a complex phenomenon at the heart of which was a belief that
compulsory, competitive team games identified and developed qualities of character that were admirable in themselves and essential for "life's long earnest strife." . . .
[Flor some sixty years from 1853 to 1914 this belief dominated not only the publicschool system but also those areas of British and Imperial society where publicschool men played the leading roles. . . .
By 1900 the original rationale for organized games had been long forgotten and
athleticism had developed its own ideological justification. Games not only postponed the mental torment of sex. They taught a morality. They developed manliness and toughness without which an expanding empire could not be run. They
encouraged patriotism as the fierce loyalty to house and school was transferred to
the regiment and the country.159
Though it might be said: "By it a ruling class disciplined and trained itself for the
more supple and effective exercise of power,"160James believed such an interpretation
was too mechanistic, too much the clever manipulation, too much the literal translation of what Arnold had intended. The psychological expression of the emergent
English bourgeoisie had been drawn from the historical and cultural materials within
which it had generated. James preferred to see the forms of their hegemony as
extracted from a movement of the national culture; a renewal of English life drawing
on the Puritan past but universal enough to affect other peoples far removed from its
origins: "This signifies, as so often in any deeply national movement, that it contained
elements of universality that went beyond the bounds of the originating nation."I6' It
would be, he maintained, the only contribution that English education would make
to the general educational ideas of Western civilization. He was not as sure (or as
clear) as he might have been in the company of Thompson of the process he termed
"modern civilization." But he did reveal one of its consequences. The English ruling
bourgeoisie, at first, had required a discipline for themselves, for their own raison
d'&tre and reproduction. They found their instrument among the cultural goods
produced by the working classes. What they extracted or embedded in athleticism
were rules of class, moral values, and a utilitarian rationalism. What they shared in
the social spectacle of the games became part of the cement that bonded the several
social orders into an identical imperial mission-one that would include even those
natives at the peripheries whose claims to an English identity would amount to a
tragic mistake. In the absence of more telling evidence, we must surmise that James
discovered that mistake in England, 30 years before he sat down to write Beyond
a Boundary.
When James and his contemporaries appeared in the metropole in the 1920s and
193os, the England in which they had been immersed had already passed. Indeed,
except in the airy fantasies manufactured by the ruling classes and their intelligentsia,

C . L . R. JAMES A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

269

it may never have existed. Among those elements that truly made a difference, the
working classes were becoming detached from their identifications with the bourgeoisie and the nobility. English workers were militantly demonstrating that they
were no longer persuaded that their future and that of the ruling classes were identical. Their betrayal by capitalism, manifested in the millions of unemployed, made
many, for the moment, no longer willing to fight imperialist wars. By the mid-ig3os,
their declared interests could be found in demonstrations like the Hunger March of
1934 and the Jarrow Crusade of 1936; and they formed into militant grass-roots
groups like the National Unemployed Workers' Movement, their numbers swelling
even the membership figures of the CPGB (in one year, 1935-36, the Party went from
7,000 to 11,500).~~~
The material crises of world capital and the political incompetence
of the ruling classes, despite the repeated betrayals by the leaderships of the Labour
Party and the trade union movement, provided a basis for a certain regeneration of
the formal working-class movement and its electoral aspect. Membership in the trade
unions expanded,163and the Labour Party, in disgrace in 1931, made substantial gains
(as did the CPGB) in the municipal elections of 1932,1933, and 1934, and the general
election of 1935.'~~
The organized Left, however, was not a major beneficiary.
For Padmore, Makonnen, and their African comrades, I. T. A. Wallace-Johnson
and Kenyatta, in the anti-imperialist Left, there was another difference. Inevitably,
even James realized that the illusion of the Empire as a global fraternity, benevolently
orchestrated by advanced races for the interests of backward ones, was at best remote
from the actualities they encountered. England, with its ever-broadening, grubby,
dark poverty, its "low-life" fascists actively aligned and identified with factions of the
ruling classes, its vulgar displays of racism (which "inexplicably" victimized those
among the colonials who were proudest of being British), and its political mediocrity,
inspired contempt, not confidence. The sheer pettiness of political discourse and
bureaucratic cant betrayed what one expected from the "English heritage" or even
from a respected enemy. These were not the actions of pretentious colonial administrators, they were manifestations in the home country itself. And while revolutionary movements of grandeur, scale, and vision could be seen emerging among "backward" peoples in India, Ceylon, China, and Africa, while even the Japanese ruling
classes were mounting a massive territorial empire and the Soviets rationalizing one,
the Left in Britain displayed characteristic factionalism, ideological "toadyism," and a
politics dishonorably distant from the working classes and their struggles. Abandoned, as Padmore believed, by their most powerful ally, the world Communist
movement, thoroughly disgusted with the duplicity of imperial policy, they turned
toward the Black radical tradition.
The Theory of the Black Jacobin

The thirties were rich in political dramas that might ground Black radical intelligentsias in their own historical traditions. Their indulgence in the militant rhetoric of the
Western European Left, evoking images of emergent revolutionary lower orders of its
270

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

own would have logically brought them to it eventually. For in the older sense of the
word, who was more proletarian than Blacks in the imperialist and capitalist order?
But it was a different, though not unrelated, historical logic that was maturing.
They read Du Bois's Black Reconstruction with its evocation of the brilliance of
Black radicalism in nineteenth-century America, and they recognized its unmistakable debt to the Black masses of the early twentieth century who had produced the
Chilembwes, the Garveys, the Lamine Senghors, and the Simon K i m b a n g ~ s .And
'~~
then in 1934-35, when the Fascist Italian army invaded Ethiopia, the dam burst.
Makonnen recalled:
It's very important to put the response of the black world to the Ethiopian War into
perspective, especially since it is easy to get the impression that pan-Africanism was
just some type of petty protest activity-a few blacks occasionally meeting in conference and sending resolutions here and there. But the real dimensions can only
be gathered by estimating the kind of vast support that Ethiopia enjoyed amongst
blacks everywhere. We were only one centre, the International African Friends of
Ethiopia, but that title was very accurate. Letters simply poured into our office
from blacks on three continents asking where could they register. . . . And the same
was true of Africa. When the Italians entered Addis Ababa, it was reported that
school children wept in the Gold Coast. . . .
It brought home to many black people the reality of colonialism, and exposed its
true nature. They could then see that the stories of Lenin and Trotsky, or Sun Yatsen, must have their African counterparts. . . . It was clear that imperialism was
a force to be reckoned with because here it was attacking the black man's last
~itade1.l~~
Within the International African Friends of Ethiopia, however, there were disagreements as to what was to be done. Makonnen believed that the "collective security" of
the League of Nations (to which Italy belonged and, paradoxically, through Italy,
Ethiopia's membership had been accepted) should be invoked, arguing that it was a
chimera unless Fascist Italy was stopped. James, who chaired the IAFE, was ambivalent, however. As an International Socialist, he accepted the Independent Labour
Party's position that all the British and French capitalists were concerned with was
~ ~ "defense" of
using Ethiopia as a pretext for a war to destroy their r i ~ a 1 s . lThe
Ethiopia was a mask for an imperialist war. He opposed the League of Nations and the
concessions (in return for sanctions against Italy) its "diplomats" had extorted from
the Emperor, himself a feudal reactionary.lbsAs a Black man, however, he had other
imperatives. With Garvey in Hyde Park, denouncing Mussolini as "the arch barbarian
of our times" and vigorously urging Blacks to support Abyssinia despite the Emperor's infamous reluctance at identifying himself as a Black man,16ywith the worldwide popular response among Blacks, James's ground was prescribed:
I offered myself through the Abyssinian Embassy here to take service under the
Emperor, military or otherwise.
C. L. R. JAMES A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

271

My reasons for this were simple. International Socialists in Britain fight British
Imperialism because obviously it is more convenient to do so than fight, for
instance, German Imperialism. But Italian Capitalism is the same enemy, only a
little further removed.
My hope was to get into the army. It would have given me an opportunity to
make contact not only with the masses of the Abyssinians and other Africans, but
in the ranks with them I would have had the best possible opportunity of putting
across the International Socialist case. I believed also that I could have been useful
in helping to organise anti-Fascist propaganda among the Italian troops.
And finally, I would have had an invaluable opportunity of gaining actual military experience on the African field where one of the most savage battles between
Capitalism and its opponents is going to be fought before very many years. . . .
I did not intend to spend the rest of my life in Abyssinia, but, all things considered, I thought, and still think, that two or three years there, given the fact that I am
a Negro and am especially interested in the African revolution, was well worth the
attempt.170
Obviously, James was in conflict. But by early 1936, the situation had resolved itself
for the moment: the occupation of Ethiopia was an accomplished fact, and the
emperor was in exile in Britain.171By the end of the year, however, the Spanish Civil
War had begun. Now the entire international Left was at war.172And Blacks from
Africa, the Caribbean, and America joined the International Brigades to fight against
the fascist forces of Spain, Germany, and Italy.'73 (And some Blacks fought for fascism: the Moroccan soldiers, General Franco's "storm-troopers.") But even before the
International Brigades were withdrawn from Spain in 1938-39, the West Indies exploded into strikes and brutal repre~si0n.l~~
The world seemed enveloped in struggle
and Blacks and the Black struggle were a part of that world. For many radicals, an
unavoidable lesson of the era was the necessity for armed resistance to oppression and
exploitation. But for James, what the Italian army had done in Ethiopia: the killing of
tens of thousands of peasants, and the complicity of the "bourgeois democracies" was
instruction enough:
Africans and people of African descent, especially those who have been poisoned
by British Imperialist education, needed a lesson. They have got it. Every succeeding day shows exactly the real motives which move imperialism in its contact with
Africa, shows the incredible savagery and duplicity of European Imperialism in its
quest for markets and raw materials. Let the lesson sink deep.'75
The lesson sank deeper than he imagined. His tutorship under European radical
thought had come to an end. From this point on his work would leap beyond the
doctrinaire constructions of the anti-Stalinist Left and Engels and Marx themselves.
The force of the Black radical tradition merged with the exigencies of Black masses in
movement to form a new theory and ideology in James's writings.
In James's view, with only the most sporadic support to be expected from the
272

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

European working classes and the European Left, the radical Black intelligentsia was
now compelled to seek the liberation of their peoples by their own means.176But
some of the others with whom he was to be associated in the successor of the IAFE, the
International African Service Bureau (1937), did not agree. When Padmore, for example, expressed his own reservations in How Britain Rules Africa, James leveled a
withering criticism:
It is on the future of Africa that the author, himself a man of African descent, is
grievously disappointing. He heads one section, "Will Britain Betray Her Trust?" as
if he were some missionary or Labour politician. In the true tradition of Lenin he
insists on the right of the African people to choose their own development. But,
astonishingly, he welcomes the appeal of "enlightened and far-sighted sections of
the ruling classes of Europe with colonial interests in Africa" to co-operate with
Africans. That is madness. How does the lion co-operate with the lamb?
Africans must win their own freedom. Nobody will win it for them. They need
co-operation, but that co-operation must be with the revolutionary movement in
Europe and Asia. There is no other way out. Each movement will neglect the other
at its peril, and there is not much time left.177
He had not forsaken the anticipation of an industrial proletarian revolution but he
had become aware of the existence of a more vigorous Black opposition than that
l ~the
~ crushing ofthe Ethiopian people
with which he was familiar in his own ~ 1 a s s .In
he had seen the naked face of Western imperialism. More importantly, however, in
Ethiopia, Spain, and the Caribbean, he had witnessed the capacities for resistance of
ordinary Black people, the transformation of peasants and workers into liberation
forces. Unlike Padmore, whose sojourn at the pinnacle of international Communism
had left him uncertain, when he could no longer rely on that source, or Kenyatta and
Williams, whose encounters with the imperial and capitalist metropoles so impressed
them as to advise caution, James became convinced that successful armed rebellion
among Black peoples was possible. The "colonial struggle and the metropolitan struggle" were identical on that score.'79For a time, this view prevailed: armed rebellion
among Blacks became the official position of the IASB. But after 1938, with James
away in America on a lecture tour that would last for 15 years, that stand was modified
by his associates:
The work of the Bureau continued all through the war and in 1945 there came a
sharp break with the theory. . . . The Bureau changed its position from the achievement of independence by armed rebellion to the achievement of independence by
non-violent mass action. But to say that is one thing, to carry it out in practice is
another. .. . To stake independence upon armed rebellion was therefore to have as a
precondition the collapse or military paralysis of the metropolitan government. It
was in other words to place the initiative for African struggle upon the European
proletariat. . . .
But by the end of the war the proletariat of Britain and France had not spoken.
C . L . R. JAMES A N D T H E B L A C K R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

273

Imperialism still held sway at home. Only a radical alteration in theory could form
a basis for action. The perspective of armed rebellion was abandoned (though held
in reserve) and non-violent mass action was s ~ b s t i t u t e d . ' ~ ~
While they pinned their hopes on the disintegrative force that war represented for the
empires, on the resurrection of liberal ideology expressed by ruling classes made
desperate by that war, and on the political consequences ofthe practical support given
by colonials to the imperial countries during the war, James immersed himself in the
American Trotskyist movement and the struggles of Black workers.181And he, too,
became reconciled to nonviolent action:
[A]s a result of the war, of revolutions and crises which had shaken contemporary
society to its foundations for almost forty consecutive years, the bourgeoisie had
lost its self-confidence in the face of a united mass movement. . . . [Wlhen all is said
and done the new political directive, breaking with the well-established ideas of the
prewar period, is one of the great theoretical achievements of the present age,
perhaps the first real break towards what the marxist movement requires today, the
application of the traditional principles of marxism in complete independence of
the stalinist perversion. It is to be noted that the theory did not reject armed
rebellion, but held it in reserve in the event that the political and moral pressure
envisaged failed to influence British i m p e r i a l i ~ m . ' ~ ~
But "nonviolent mass action" threw the Black struggle back into the hands of the petit
bourgeoisie, albeit a radical petit bourgeoisie. It was they who would mediate between
the mass movement and the representatives of imperialism. And neither James nor
any of the others ever came to terms with this theoretical error.la3It was simply the
case that the demand for the right of Black people to govern themselves (the position
adopted at the Fifth Pan-African Congress in Manchester in 1945) articulated by a
radical intelligentsia speaking on behalf of the dominated would have historical
consequences quite different from those that resulted from the Black masses seizing
their liberation.la4
Nevertheless, James's intervention had been significant. He had made a singular
contribution to radical Black historiography when he and his comrades in the IASB
were mapping out their contending positions in the last years of the third, and during
the fourth decade of the century. It was then that Padmore had written How Britain
Rules Africa, Eric Williams his The Negro in the Caribbean, Kenyatta his Kenya: Land
of Conjlict, and James The Black Jacobins. The first three had proposed national
independence for African peoples but were addressed to the colonial powers. The
fourth had not appealed. Instead, it was a declaration of war for liberation. "[T]hose
black Haitian labourers and the Mulattoes have given us an example to study. . . . The
imperialists envisage an eternity of African exploitation: the African is backward,
ignorant. . . . They dream dreams."la5
The theoretical frame for The Black Jucobins was, of course, the theories of revolution developed by Marx, Engels, Lenin, and Trotsky. James asserted that fact rather
274

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

frequently in the text. It was not, however, entirely the case. From Marx and Engels, he
had taken the concept of a revolutionary class and the economic foundations for its
historical emergence. But the slaves of Haiti were not a Marxian proletariat. No
matter to James: the processes of social formation were the same:
The slaves worked on the land, and, like revolutionary peasants everywhere, they
aimed at the extermination of their oppressors. But working and living together in
gangs of hundreds on the huge sugar-factories which covered North Plain, they
were closer to a modern proletariat than any group of workers in existence at the
time, and the rising was, therefore, a thoroughly prepared and organized mass
movement. (pp. 85-86)
Moreover, James seemed willing to challenge Marx and Engels on the very grounds
they had laid for the sociological and political significance of early capitalism. While
they had been content to locate the formation of the modern revolutionary proletariat at the core of capitalist industrial production, James was insisting that the
sphere be broadened. "At the same time as the French [masses], the half-savage slaves
of San Domingo were showing themselves subject to the same historical laws as the
advanced workers of revolutionary Paris" (p. 243). Capitalism had produced its social
and historical negations in both poles of its expropriation: capitalist accumulation
gave birth to the proletariat at the manufacturing core; "primitive accumulation"
deposited the social base for the revolutionary masses in the peripheries. But what
distinguished the formations of these revolutionary classes was the source of their
ideological and cultural developments. While the European proletariat had been
formed through and by the ideas of the bourgeoisie ("the ruling ideas," Marx and
Engels had maintained, "were the ideas of the ruling class"), in Haiti and presumably
elsewhere among slave populations, the Africans had constructed their own revolutionary culture:
[Olne does not need education or encouragement to cherish a dream of freedom.
At their midnight celebrations of Voodoo, their African cult, they danced and sang,
usually this favorite song:
Eh! Eh! Bomba! Heu! Heu!
Canga, bafio te!
Canga, Moune de le!
Canga, do ki la!
Canga, li!
"We swear to destroy the whites and all that they possess; let us die rather than fail
to keep this vow." The colonists knew this song and tried to stamp it out, and the
Voodoo cult with which it was linked. In vain. (p. 18)
Voodoo was the medium of the conspiracy. In spite of all prohibitions, the slaves
traveled miles to sing and dance and practice the rites and talk; and now, since the
revolution, to hear the political news and make their plans. (p. 86)
C . L. R. JAMES A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

275

This was a complete departure from the way in which Marx and Engels had conceptualized the transformative and rationalizing significance of the bourgeoisie. It implied (and James did not see this) that bourgeois culture and thought and ideology
were irrelevant to the development of revolutionary consciousness among Black and
other Third World peoples. It broke with the evolutionist chain in, the closed dialectic
of, historical materialism. But where James was to hesitate, Cabral, as we have noted
before, would stride boldly forward:
[N]ational liberation is the phenomenon in which a given socio-economic whole
rejects the negation of its historical process. In other words, the national liberation
of a people is the regaining of the historical personality of that people, its return
to history through the destruction of the imperialist domination to which it was
subjected.lg6
But James's effort to level Marxist theory to the requirements of Black radical
historiography was not finished. Though he bore a great respect for the work and
thought of Lenin, there too he suggested a more imaginative treatment. With Lenin's
notion of a cadre of professional revolutionists, the beginnings of the vanguard party
in mind, James went so far as to designate an entire stratum, describing in precise
terms how it was formed: "The leaders of a revolution are usually those who have
been able to profit by the cultural advantages of the system they are attacking" (p. 19).
This was an admission of class pride that neither Lenin nor Marx or Engels had been
prepared to make.lE7Though surely it was an inadvertent admission, one that revealed James's own class origins, it also reflected a certain historical clarity.lg8The
petit bourgeois intelligentsia had played dominant roles in Marxist thought as well as
in the Bolshevik victory in Russia. The theory and the ideology of revolution was
theirs, and unarguably too, the Russian state. They had brought to the working-class
movement their "superior knowledge and the political vices which usually accompany it," as James would say of Toussaint (p. 95).
In San Domingo, the revolutionary masses had found a most propitious figure in
Toussaint L'Ouverture. He knew the enemy better than they. That had been one of his
rewards as a functionary in the slave system.
His post as steward of the livestock had given him experience in administration,
authority, and intercourse with those who ran the plantation. Men who, by sheer
ability and character, find themselves occupying positions usually reserved for
persons of a different upbringing, education and class, usually perform those
duties with exceptional care and devoted labour. In addition . . . [he had] read
Caesar's Commentaries . . . read and re-read the long volume by the Abbe Raynal. . . . [H]ehad a thorough grounding in the economics and politics, not only of
San Domingo, but of all the great empires of Europe. . . . His superb intellect had
therefore had some opportunity of cultivating itself in general affairs at home and
abroad. (p. 91)

276

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

But in the end, Toussaint had also failed the revolution. James more than sympathized
with some of Toussaint's failures: "Toussaint knew the backwardness of the labourers;
he made them work, but he wanted to see them civilised and advanced in culture. . . .
He was anxious to see the blacks acquire the social deportment of the better class
whites with their Versailles manners" (p. 246). And he also believed that Toussaint
was correct in thinking that the propertied whites who remained or returned to San
Domingo were needed to help the former slaves to construct a modern state: "His
unrealistic attitude to the former masters, at home and abroad, sprang not from any
abstract humanitarianism or loyalty, but from a recognition that they alone had what
San Domingo society needed (p. 290). This last in almost direct contradiction to his
beliefs 30 years later: "Slaves ran the plantations; those tremendous plantations, the
great source of wealth of so many English aristocrats and merchants, the merchant
princes who cut such a figure in English society (and French too, but we are speaking
of English society)."la9Yet others, even more recently, have agreed with the earlier
James.lYoIn 1938, however, James knew that the former slaves, Toussaint's contemporaries, did not agree. When they acted on those beliefs and rebelled against Toussaint because they were no longer willing to accept his egoistic compromises with
the colonial bourgeoisie and the Bonapartist regime in France, Toussaint had them
hunted down and executed (p. 285). That tragedy, James argued, was because Toussaint "explained nothing, and allowed the masses to think that their old enemies were
being favoured at their expense" (p. 284). But more importantly, James insisted,
Toussaint's failure had been the result of events beyond his control: "If he failed, it is
for the same reason that the Russian socialist revolution failed, even after all its
achievements-the defeat of the revolution in Europe" (p. 283). But James was quite
aware that there was much that had been within Toussaint's range and much that he
had botched. He seemed to sense that for all the importance that might be rightly
placed on the counterrevolution in Europe and for all the genius that could be
ascribed to Toussaint in the early periods of the revolution, there was still something
that was terribly wrong in the man's make-up. Indeed, James admitted, Haitian
leaders of much narrower experience and education than Toussaint would overcome
difficulties that his psychology could not confront. And in an extraordinary series of
paragraphs he tried to reconcile his admiration for the man, for the revolutionary
masses that had constructed him (as I would argue), and these figures to whom
history attached the completion of the Haitian revolution. These passages better than
most reveal the sources of James's contradictions in 1938:
[Bletween Toussaint and his people there was no fundamental difference of outlook or of aim. Knowing the race question for the political and social question that
it was, he tried to deal with it in a purely political and social way. It was a grave
error. Lenin in his thesis to the Second Congress of the Communist International
warned the white revolutionaries-a warning they badly need-that such has been
the effect of the policy of imperialism on the relationship between advanced and

C . L . R. JAMES A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

277

backward peoples that European Communists will have to make wide concessions
to natives of colonial countries in order to overcome the justified prejudice which
these feel toward all classes in the oppressing countries. Toussaint, as his power
grew, forgot that. He ignored the black laborers, bewildered them at the very
moment that he needed them most, and to bewilder the masses is to strike the
deadliest of all blows at the revolution. . . . The whites were whites of the old
regime. Dessalines did not care what they said or thought. The black labourers had
to do the fighting-and it was they who needed reassurance. It was not that Toussaint had any illusions about the whites. He had none whatever. . . .
Yet Toussaint's error sprang from the very qualities that made him what he was.
It is easy to see to-day, as his generals saw after he was dead, where he had erred. It
does not mean that they or any of us would have done better in his place. If
Dessalines could see so clearly and simply, it was because the ties that bound this
uneducated soldier to French civilisation were of the slenderest. He saw what was
under his nose so well because he saw no further. Toussaint's failure was the failure
of enlightenment, not of darkness. (pp. 286,287,288)
Alas, from no less an authority than James himself, we know this last defense of
Toussaint was not without its element of rationalization. As Toussaint wasted away in
his prison in the Jura mountains, writing his letters of supplication to the little
emperor, his vision gave him away: "Despite the treachery of France he still saw
himself as a part of the French Republic 'one and indivisible.' He could not think
otherwise . . . there was a limit beyond which he could not go" (p. 364). We, of course,
recognize James (and perhaps even his impressions of Padmore) in these assertions.
We can see the declared identification of a Black revolutionary intelligentsia with the
masses; the willingness to continue the submission to "scientific socialism" by denying the material force of ideology while indicating a bitter disappointment with the
Communist movement; the patronizing attitude toward the organic leaders of the
masses; and the ambivalent pride of place presumed for the Westernized ideologue.
Moreover, it is clear that James was looking critically at his own class. Unlike his
confederates, he was compelled to face up to the boundaries beyond which the
revolutionary petit bourgeoisie could not be trusted. For that reason he was to insist
often that the revolutionary masses must preserve to themselves the direction of the
revolutionary movement, never deferring to professional revolutionists, parties, or
the intelligentsia. But we shall return to that in a moment.
Coming t o Terms with the
Marxist Tradition

The year following the printing of Jacobins, James published A History of Negro
Revolt. This was to be his last sustained statement on Pan-Africanism until the
appearance of Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution. It was, though, a minor piece,
summarizing in historical shorthand some of the occasions of Black rebellion in the
278

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

diaspora and Africa in the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries.lY1It would
prove to be of some use three decades later but it was casually written, more a public
lecture than a study. James was now at the center of the Trotskyist international
movement,192and soon he was to be just as immersed in the American theater,
stirring things up in New York, disputing with Trotsky over the Negro Question,lY3
organizing share-croppers and tenant farmers in southeast M i ~ s 0 u r i . l ~ ~
Ten years after Jacobins, James wrote a second masterpiece amid a crisis in which he
was deeply involved. And on this occasion he found it necessary to frontally assault
some of the principal figures of the Marxist movement. Notes on Dialectics was
written in the late 1940slY5
a moment when the preoccupations of the Second World
War had faded, leaving American Marxists free to ponder the changed circumstances
they faced: the significance of postwar arrangements between the Soviet Union and
the "Western powers"; the reactions of their country's working classes to the domination of the world economies by American capital; the orchestrated expulsions of
Communists from the American labor movement; the convergent pressures on the
Communist movement from the American government and the Soviet Union, andfor Trotskyists-the future of the Fourth International shorn of Trotsky, its unifying
By now James had become a prominent intellectual and organizer in the
Socialist Workers' Party (swp), the American representation of the Fourth International. In this restricted arena it is fair to say he was being recognized for what he
was: one of the leading Marxist historian/philosophers in the country. With Max
Shachtman, however, he and others had withdrawn from the SWP.In the early 1940s
they formed the Workers' Party with 600 or so members.lY7Then, in 1942, a further
split had occurred, a group centering around James and Raya Dunayevskaya, the
Later, in 1949 or so, the
Johnson-Forest tendency, had left the "Shachtmanite~.'"~~
Johnson-Forest tendency would rejoin the swp only to become resolutely independent again two years later.myThey required more:
We had broken with Trotsky's analysis of the nature of the Russian state since the
death of Lenin. . . .We came to the conclusion that a fundamental investigation still
remained to be done, on Hegel's Science of Logic (with that of course had to be
associated the smaller Logic, a section of Hegel's E n c y ~ l o p e d i a ) . ~ ~ ~

Notes on Dialectics was James's contribution: it was his logical and philosophical
consideration and reconstruction of the history of the labor movement in relation to
the formation of revolutionary action, parties, and revolutionary thought in the
European experience. The grammar of the work, its logical structure, was grounded
on Hegel's construction of the dialectic. It was at once an exposition of Hegel's
philosophical method and the historical movement of the working classes. And when
it was written its immediate purpose was to provide a rationale and a historical object
for the political activity of his small organization: To preserve for his comrades the
claim for the Leninism of an authentic socialism.201It was they who were seeking to
contain a catastrophe, to rescue Marxism from its self-inflicted wounds (Stalinism
and Trotskyism) thus preserving its theoretical and political core (historical materialC . L . R. JAMES A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

279

ism and the revolutionary proletariat). Their task was not an easy one. It was not just
the political battle to be waged: a small organization in opposition to former (Trotskyist) colleagues, in opposition to Stalinism, the trade union bureaucracies, the apparatuses of the American state, and world capitalism. Those forces were more than
balanced, they believed, since they were in the company of the proletarian masses.
History and numbers were on their side. More decisive were the contradictions they
hoped to rationalize. As Marxists they were compelled to juggle contending impulses.
They were a radical intelligentsia contemptuous of the revolutionary petit bourgeoisie, in some sense themselves. They were revolutionary ideologues charged by
their tradition to "criticize everything" while conserving the figures of Marx and
Lenin. They were committed to the abolition of parties but their entire political
history had been in association and contention with revolutionary parties. They were
renegade bourgeois ideologists, trained in the ruling ideas of their time yet they
believed in the imperative of penetrating the consciousness of the working classes in
order to comprehend the proletariat's historical activity. And despite their sometimes
feverish energies they were essentially contemplative didactics coupled with revolutionary action. James could not escape these contradictions any more than Grace Lee
(Boggs) or Dunayevskaya. Neither could Notes on Dialectics. It contained an ideate
from which James had no intention of departing but was compelled to leave behind.
He supposed Hegel's dialectic would resolve the dilemma.
The delinquent premise was restated by James in the 1980 edition of the work:
"What is then the beginning of the labour movement? We find the historical beginning in the French revolution as Marx saw it" (p. lo; my emphasis). This was the
unchallengeable presupposition: Marxists had to begin where Marx had begun and as
Marx had begun. It meant that the assumption made in Marx's vision of modern
history had to persist in James's consideration of social revolution: the notion that
implied that the proletariat constituted a class like the bourgeoisie. Like most Marxists, James was quite unwilling to contemplate that, as Cornelius Castoriadis has made
clearer than anyone, since the appearance of the bourgeoisie was historically the
origin of the category class it would be philosophically and historically impossible for
the proletariat to recapitulate the social and ideological experience of the bourgeoisie.
It could not become a class in those terms.202But there had to be limits within which
the Johnson-Forest tendency was to remain. They had realized almost too late that as
Trotskyists, without knowing it, they had flirted with the disintegration of Marxism:
"[T]rotskyist thinking, persisted in, led the posing of the question of the disintegration of marxist theory, questioning whether we might not have to ask ourselves if it
were valid" (p. 56). Their need to do things differently was to be a disciplined need.
And in his consideration of Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin, and Marx, James made good use of
his predecessors, holding strictly to the lights of the tradition. His critique, notwithstanding his fundamental deference, was true to form: internally consistent, devastatingly powerful, erudite, and logically near-flawless. Within its own terms James
would take the philosophic discourse of the Marxian tradition to its most complete
realization in the postwar years.
280

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

He began by assuring his comrades that their appearance, their work, and their
politics, based on the evolution of state-capitalism and the proletarian impulse for an
organizational form that transcended the revolutionary party, were anticipated in
Hegel's Science of Logic: their's were the "new ideas" Hegel had anticipated. The
opposition to them among Stalinists, Trotskyists, and Shachtmanites was corrupted
by formalism and opportunism. Paraphrasing Hegel, James asserted:
Imperceptibly the new ideas became familiar even to their opposers, who appropriated them and-though persistently slighting and gainsaying the sources and
principles of those ideas-yet had to accept their results.
We can see this is our whole development. The chief, or one of the most striking
examples is our application of the law of value to the Russian economy. Today these
God-damned scoundrels all turn up and say "of course"! But you could look
through the literature of the Fourth International for pages and pages. I do not
remember any statements to that effect. (p. 13)
He reminded them that Hegel had distinguished between vulgar empiricism, understanding, and Reason (dialectical thought), charging each with a certain value, a certain threshold of thought. The Dialectic was the ultimate realization of the Mind, of
the Subject. Clearly, he suggested, Lenin had been capable of dialectical thought, capable of transcending through his thought the old categories (Second International)
that he had inherited: "The Russian revolution of February caused violent changes in
Lenin's categories. World War I set him revising the categories of the Second International" (p. 17). On the other hand, however, Trotsky had been limited to Understanding, a necessary and useful stage of thought but one that could end in its
reduction to absolute categories: "He would have been able to lecture you on changing categories most profoundly. He talked about it all the time. But fixed and finite
determinations held him by the throat to the end" (p. 18).Trotsky had been unwilling
to recognize the true significance of Stalinism: "stalinism as a necessary, an inevitable,
form of development of the labour movement. The workers are not mistaken. They
are not deceived. Not in any serious sense of these words. They are making an
experience that is necessary to their own development" (p. 30). Trotsky had been
convinced that a labor bureaucracy (as had occurred with the old category: the
Second International) would protect private property; Trotsky had been committed
to the end to winning the debate with Stalin over the permanent revolution versus
socialism in one country. While the Stalinists were practical and went about seizing
and then preserving their power (and, incidentally, state property), Trotsky continued
to defend himself in the most fixed terms: contending with his ghosts over who was
closer to Lenin.
Thus the debate, beginning with socialism in a single country, remained for ever
and ever within the categories of leninism. Stalin said: whatever I do is leninism.
Trotsky said no: it is not leninism. I am the genuine leninist. That was the setting.
Stalin was not very serious about it. His actions were pure empiricism. Trotsky was
C . L. R . JAMES A N D T H E B L A C K R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

281

serious about this leninism and was caught in it and strangled in it. He was entirely
wrong in every theoretical and practical conclusion that was drawn from the
debate. . . . The debate was that socialism could not be built in a single country.
Does anyone believe that Stalin or any of his people believe that what is in Russia is
socialism? Only an utter fool can think so. What the debate was about was whether
the state-property system would be maintained without a revolution sooner or
later in the West. (p. 350)
And of course while Trotsky was preoccupied, fixed at the level of Understanding, he
never possessed the energy nor the insight to realize that Stalinism . . . could only be
understood by revealing its economic basis: "He did not see that the revolutionary
Third International had succumbed to state capitalism aided by Russian imperialism.
He never wrote about the economic changes, what he thought about it, if he did, he
never thought of sufficient importance to set down. . . ." "Astonishing, isn't it?" (p. 37).
Those who wished to continue with the struggles of the proletariat, to comprehend
the emergence of Stalinism, could no longer afford to indulge Trotsky:
The new categories, the impulses, the instinctive actions, the strong knots formed,
were observed, talked about, but always incorporated into the old shell; state
capitalism or reformist international that would destroy private property and refuse to support the bourgeoisie in imperialist war, an anti-proletarian bureaucracy
that throve on state property and would defend it to the last against private property, all the knots, impulses, etc. which drove these into the mind, were allowed in
only in so far as they filled into the formed and finished categories which Lenin left.
That is why what were the results of Reason in one generation become Understanding in another, and the negating, the transcending of the determinations into a
higher unity cannot be done. (p. 34)
Trotsky had thus mistaken Stalinism for a workers' bureaucracy, he had been incapable of transcending the once powerful categories derived from the experience of the
Second International (p. 59) in order to recognize the further maturation of the
contradictions of a workers' movement in capitalist society. Hegel, of course, had
anticipated Trotsky's error: consciousness discovering what "was truth only for the
particular vision, criterion, standards with which it looked on the world (p. 54).=03
Appearance had superseded Actuality:
But you and I are dialecticians. We know that stalinism today is the true state of
the labour movement. It is revolutionary, repudiating parliamentarianism, private
property, national defence, and national boundaries. It is however attached to an
imperialism as patron and is bureaucratic and aims at totalitarian control of labour
and then of capital. (p. 43)

. . . To know true reality, to understand the labour movement, is to know that at
each stage it degenerates but splits to re-instate its self-identity, its unity, but that
this unity comes from divisions within its own self. . . .
282

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

Stalinism is a bitter obstacle. But see it as part of a process. Through the process
of its own development, the seriousness, the suffering, the patience, and the labour
of the negative, the labour movement goes through all its experiences and reaches
its completely realized self only by conquering them one after the other. And only
at the end, when the labour movement finds itself fully realized will we see what it is
in very truth. (p. 65)
Lenin had recognized the workers in Hegel's discussions of the Doctrines of Being
and Essence. It could be seen that his note on the Logic contained his revolutionary
program in formation (pp. 98-106). He had discerned the self-movement of the proletariat, the movement that was the working class's being. He comprehended that:
The essence of a thing is the fact that it must move, reflect itself, negate the
reflection, which was nothing, become being, and then become nothing again,
while the thing itself must move on because it is its nature to do so. . . . The essence
of the proletariat is its movement to incorporate in itself experience of the evils of
capitalism until it overcomes capitalism itself. (p. 78)
James insisted that Lenin would have understood that "The history of the Third
International is the history of the supersession of leninism by stalinism," and that
finally, "If the Fourth International is to supersede stalinism then it must 'contain'
stalinism in its concept of itself. It begins from all the things that stalinism took over
from leninism and kept. . . . The Other of stalinism is an international socialist
economic order, embracing from the start whole continents" (p. 87). Because "this
amazing, this incredible man" (p. 138) had understood the Soviets when they came in
1 9 1 7 ~(but
~ ~ admittedly not in 1905), Lenin would know that in a movement dominated by the capitalist perversion of the revolutionary party he created:

There is nothing more to organize. You can organize workers as workers, You can
create a special organization of revolutionary workers. But once you have those two
you have reached an end. Organization as we have known it is at an end. The task is
to abolish organization. The task today is to call for, to teach, to illustrate, to
develop spontaneity-the free creative activity of the proletariat. The proletariat
will find its method of proletarian organization. And, contradiction par excellence,
at this stage the vanguard can only organize itself on the basis of the destruction of
the stranglehold that the existing organizations have on the proletariat by means of
which it is suffering such ghastly defeats. (p. 117)
Stalinism, the counterrevolution that had emerged from "arrested" Leninism (p. 150),
would inevitably and spontaneously be opposed by the workers' movement because
the "great masses or classes" only learned through "struggle against some concrete
thing" (p. 93).
The proletariat itself will smash stalinism to pieces. This experience will teach it its
final lesson, that the future lies in itself, and not in anything which claims to
represent it or direct it. (p. 92)
C . L. R . JAMES A N D THE BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

283

James finished the work, harvesting all these materials. He culled them in order to
present one of the most exciting historical constructions to be produced by a Marxist
thinker. Patiently, deliberately, systematically, but always mediated by his lyrical and
sometimes mischievous literary "voice," he distilled from 300 years of European
history the processes and lineages of the contending forces within the proletarian
movement: the revolutionary petit bourgeoisie and the working masses. The former,
he maintained, made its first appearance in the English Civil War of the seventeenth
century as radical democrats; the latter were the social basis for the revolutionary
masses behind the French Revolution. However, each had undergone transformations through the long years between their appearances and the present (that is, 1948).
These changes were the results not of years, but of capitalism. These two opposing
historical forces had at last reached their final articulation in Stalinism and Fascism.
In Stalinism, the petit bourgeoisie had organized the attempted destruction of the
revolutionary proletariat. The petit bourgeoisie began by using the workers to destroy
the bourgeoisie and then the suppression of the workers' movement had followed.
In Fascism, the petit bourgeoisie had become the social instrument of the increasingly
desperate bourgeoisie in the effort to destroy the same historical subject: the workers' movement. Together Fascism and Stalinism constituted the objective movement
(centralization) of capitalist organization (p. 201). The continuing development of
the organization of capitalist production and the bureaucratic administration of state
capitalism had called forth a petit bourgeois class of enormous skill, responsibility,
and ambitions. Within those same centuries, then, though it was possible to trace the
maturation of the bourgeoisie and the working classes, it was also necessary to recognize the transformation of the petit bourgeoisie. It was necessary because this strata had
presumed the leadership of the proletarian movement and then betrayed it. Now the
radical intelligentsia at the service of the proletarian revolution-activists like those in
the Johnson-Forest tendency-had to respond to these events. First it had to comprehend them, ceasing to identify the perversion of petit bourgeois leadership with the
authentic forces of the revolution. Second, the "vanguard of the vanguard" had to
assist the proletariat in the destruction of the "revolutionary proletarian" bureaucracy. The direction of the world was in the hands of the workers: "The proletariat
will decide. The thing is to tell the proletariat to decide" (p. 181).
To the misfortune of Notes on Dialectics, it was an internal document. Thus for two
decades its distribution was restricted, the more so since the movement to which it
was addressed was small. It would not be widely read for 30 years. But, though James
came to recognize it as his most extraordinary work, it did contain certain limitations. The most obvious problem stemmed from James's fascination for Hegel's mode
of argumentation: the distillation of history into rich concentrates used solely for the
grounding of abstract discourse. It was also the case that this history was exclusively
European-an inadvertent but natural substantiation of Hegel's own assertion of
where history could occur. James's style was also familiar in another way: the language
was the combative one of Marxist exegeses (inherited from German philosophy)-a

284

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

dismissive tongue used to humiliate opposition. Its results were predictable corollaries: the absolute deprecation of the Fallen (Stalin, Trotsky, Shachtman, etc.) in
contrast to oratory for True Thinkers (Hegel, Marx, Engels, Lenin). James relished the
form and employed it consistently until he was able to rescue the tenor of his argument in the historical flourish with which he ended. Still, Notes on Dialectics was a
remarkable achievement. It was a too rare example of a living, active, grappling
Marxism. Its conceits were small ones given the company it kept. Though its author
had not hesitated to assume the role of headmaster to Western Marxists, his grounds
were substantial: the questions then being raised in the Marxist movement were so
misconceived as inevitably to suggest abolition of the tradition itself. He had in many
ways succeeded in anchoring Marx's thought in the twentieth century when to many
it seemed that Lenin had accomplished the very opposite: its annihilation as a reference. He had shown a new direction when it seemed all such possibilities were at
an end.
Our treatment of James must end here. However, his writing and politics continued. Deported from the United States in 1952, he returned to Britain, spent a few
years at home in Trinidad only to return to the United States then Britain. Following
Notes on Dialectics, he wrote State Capitalism and World Revolution (1950). At Ellis
Island, while awaiting action by the U.S. Department of Immigration and Naturalization, he composed Mariners, Renegades and Castaways, a politico-literary critique of
Herman Melville's Moby-Dick and Pierre that included observations on detention
and his personal, conflict-ridden encounter with "American" Communist prisoners.
Within the next ten years he was to publish Facing Reality (with Grace Lee and Pierre
Chaulieu, 1958), Modern Politics (his 1960 lectures in Trinidad), Beyond a Boundary, a
significant appendix to the reissue of The Black Jacobins (1963), and a stream of
reviews, introductions, articles, and position papers the range ofwhich is suggested in
the recently published collections: The Future in the Present and Spheres of Existence.
Of his major works, it was the first that would draw James into the orbit of radical
thought in the 1960s and afterward. It was the Black diaspora, particularly the militant Black petit bourgeoisie that had grown impatient with American apartheid,
which would rediscover Jacobins. First the book and then the author would help them
to confirm their ideological struggle with bourgeois culture. The mass Black movement provided the compulsion. James astounded this new Black intelligentsia with
his brilliant thought, his provocative analyses, and his grasp of Black history. He
became once again "Nello" to intimates two generations younger than his contemporaries, he became the teacher they could honor, a living, absorbing link between
themselves and a past of which most had only a vague notion (or, just as frequently, a
profound expectation). But he also sometimes saddened them, pitching divisive battles in fields peopled only with Marxian phantoms.205When they had recovered him,
he had again become accustomed to presenting himself as a "Black E u r ~ p e a n . " ~ " ~
Some came to understand something of what he expected of them. But he also
learned: "[A] great deal of my time has been spent in seeing how much I failed to

C . L. R. JAMES A N D T H E BLACK R A D I C A L T R A D I T I O N

285

understand when I was young and my whole life was toward European literature,
European sociology. Now I'm beginning to see and it is helping me to write."207
Perhaps his long-awaited autobiography will ultimately demonstrate just how permanently their reflective gift of the Black radical tradition has affected him. What he gave
them is no mystery.

286

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

an insidious social order, its alternative mapping of the historical origins of the ruling
classes, which they had come to despise, and its identification with the underclasses,
made it an almost irresistible companion. Moreover, Marxists were under no obligation to minimize what the total thrust of bourgeois thought was orchestrated to deny:
that the "natural" social order tended toward instability and chaos. On the contrary,
Marxian logic composed a historical order from the anarchic, wrenching social forces
within the capitalist world system. Marxism was (and remains) a superior grammar
for synthesizing the degradation of labor with the growing destabilization of capitalist
production and accelerating technological development; the increasing resort to state
coercion mediated by bureaucratic rationalism; and the strangulation of whole regions (most of them formerly colonies) through pricing mechanisms, market manipulation, monopolization of advanced technology, the international organization of
production, international banking, military assistance, and the stultifying dependencies of monocultural economics. Marxism, too, implied that it was the particular
privilege of the revolutionary intellectual to comprehend this deeper, extra-existential
order. And in the generation of these Black intellectuals, with apparent finality Marxism was confirmed in its historical authority by the Russian Revolution.
This last identification, though, was to prove to be an ambiguous one. In the minds
of Black intellectuals, within a quarter of a century, the significance of the Third
International had substantially degenerated. For some, like Padmore, and later Cox,
international Communism (Stalinism) was simply another deceitful Western invention; for others like James it was its own perversion; finally, for those who were to
share Du Bois's experience, it seemed merely a convenient means of protest. However,
detached from the Communist movement, Marxist theory could retain important
capacities. Notwithstanding its weaknesses, there was in Marxism a critical discourse
to which no bourgeois ideology adequately responded. Capitalism's global regularities of war, expanding poverty and exploitation, the concentration of wealth, and the
extension of repression persisted. Bourgeois thinkers displaced these endemic phenomena with the notion of termed, resolvable dysfunctions. Marxists correctly declared they were no such things.
There was, however, much more to these radical Black intellectuals than their class
origins and the contradictions they experienced consequent to the racial castes of
Western civilization. More profoundly than "scientific" Marxism could suggest, they
were an element of a historically emergent social force, the Black radical movement.
And though intellectually disciplined in such ways as to oppose its conscious realization, their ideological nurturing as Blacks prepared them for its eventual recognition.
It is possible to see, even in such Westernized intellects as James and Du Bois, that the
historical force of the Black movement was the more powerful influence. Even their
discovery of Western radicalism proved to be insufficient. As we have seen, it became
necessary to both of them to attempt to bring Marxist theory to bear on a historical
phenomenon for which its analytical vocabulary was inadequate. From the moments
of these efforts, neither Du Bois nor James, nor Padmore nor Cox could sustain a
commitment to orthodox Marxism.
288

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

But there were also others in whose work a similar contestation could be discerned;
others emergent from Black societies and in search of an articulated opposition to
Western racism and bourgeois society. One of these, Richard Wright, is of particular
interest. Unlike those upon whom we have already focused, Wright was not of the
petit bourgeoisie. His roots were in the Black peasantry of the American South. His
encounter with Marxism and the Communist movement was largely unmediated by
the cultural misdirections that accompanied the intellectual awakenings of middleclass Black men and women. His childhood and adolescence in Mississippi, subject to
the most direct exposure to racist brutality and brutalization, provided him little
appreciation for or expectations of bourgeois society and its culture.' He came to
Marxism for reasons that were fundamentally different from those of our previous
subjects. And when he withdrew, he was different too. His insights into his experience
of the Communist movement and into Marxist thought suggest an alternative penetration into the relationship between European radical thought and the historical
configurations of the Black movement.
The ambiguity surrounding Wright is, in part, a consequence of his own intellectual odyssey. More precisely it is a consequence of his public honesty about the
voyage. It was a journey that took him from Marxism, and through Existentialism,
and finally to Black nationalism-a journey that could be retraced biographically
from his membership in the American Communist Party in the early 1930s to his
death in France in 1960.
But another and equally important source for the undefined character of Wright's
legacy is the several and remarkably extensive campaigns of vilification launched
against him by the American Left, the American liberal intelligentsia and American
bureaucrats. These ranged from the literary attacks on Wright by writers such as
, ~the political assaults of figures like James Ford,3 Ben burn^,^ then
James B a l d ~ i nto
editor of Ebony, the deliberately distorted reports in Time magazine on Wright and
other^,^ the machinations of the Central Intelligence Agency: and threats from oncepowerful, but now almost forgotten anti-Communists like David S ~ h i n eIt. ~appears
to be a fair statement that though these distinct and, in some instances, opposing
political factions had rather different interests in the destruction of Wright's influence
on American politics and literature, they did concur on the desirability of the suppression of his work and ideas.8
In any case, the result was the same: Wright's self-imposed geographical exile was
transformed into an intellectual and political isolation. Moreover, some of these same
forces sought further retribution from Wright by filling his life in Europe and Great
Britain with harassments of both petty and terrifying dimension^.^ It was intended
that Wright realize the full consequence of criticizing American domestic racial policies and attacking American foreign policy in the Third World.
Yet despite his detractors and their sponsors, despite the established and powerful
political and cultural authorities of American society, some of Wright's work and
ideas survived. The re-emergence of Wright's importance in American thought may
appear at first ironical. So many of his critics are now rather thin shadows in history.
R I C H A R D W R I G H T A N D T H E C R I T I Q U E O F CLASS T H E O R Y

289

But, more accurately, it is the result of the social and historical contradictions of
American capitalism and its particular social order.
In the midst of the Black consciousness and nationalist movements of the 1960s,
the seemingly irresistible dictates of the market compelled the republishing of the
Outsider (1965), Native Son (1966), Black Boy (1966), Eight Men (1969), and later,
American Hunger (1977).1°They were works that spoke to a generation that Wright
did not live to see but had anticipated. Significant,too, was the emergence of younger
and equally militant Black writers and playwrights (among them John A. Williams,
Leroi Jones, Ed Bullins, Melvin Van Peebles, and Ishmael Reed). Much of their work
would have fallen quite easily into what one American critic, Robert Bone, had called
"the Wright School" ("For the Wright School, literature is an emotional catharsis-a
means of dispelling the inner tensions of race. Their novels often amount to a prolonged cry of anguish and despair. Too close to their material, feeling it too intensely,
these novelists lack a sense of form and of thematic line.")," except for the fact that
Bone had already announced the death of that school 20 years earlier: "By the late
1940s the vein of literary material unearthed by Richard Wright had been all but
worked out. The market for protest had become sat~rated."'~
It does appear that Bone
was a bit premature.
More remarkable, however, than the sheer survival of Wright's work, is the theoretical and analytical power of his ideas. This achievement of Wright's, with the stimulus
of historical materialism and psychoanalysis, fell much closer to an emergent European literature (Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, Koestler, Lukacs, Marcuse, Kolakowski) in the
post-Second World War period than to any American fashion. Like many European
Left intellectuals, Wright was moving beyond classical Marxism and the Marxism
inspired by Lenin in order to come to terms with a world constituted of material and
spiritual forces historically unique. Wright's reach, consequently, can be said to be
much longer than that implied by the terms employed by many of his American
critics. He was never merely a "racial novelist," a "protest writer," or a "literary
rebel."13 Indeed, much of his work was a direct confrontation with the leading ideas
and ideational systems of contemporary Western political and social thought. His
arena was the totality of Western civilization and its constitutive elements: industrialization, urbanization, alienation, class, racism, exploitation, and the hegemony of
bourgeois ideology. His work thus constituted an inquiry.
Wright's persistence in his investigation of Western society was an important factor
contributing to the achievement of a certain consistency in his work. As artist, as
essayist, as critic, as political activist, it is clear that he arranged and rearranged many
times the elements making up the phenomenological display of Western development. He knew the names of Western experience but was less certain of what he knew
of their nature and their systemic and historical relationships. There were questions
to which he still had to find answers: was the working class a social reality? Could class
consciousness supersede racism as an ideology? Was the party the vanguard of the
proletariat? Was Marxism more than a critique of capitalism? These were some of the
issues to which Wright had not found satisfactory answers in organized and organiza190 BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

tional politics. Ultimately, it would be because of his particular skill for transforming
theoretical abstractions and constructs into recognizably human experience that it
became possible for him to make those distinctions between dogma and reality so
important to his development.
Theoretically and ideologically, Wright came to terms with Western thought and
life through Black nationalism. However, the basis for his critique of Western society
was his experience of the historical formation of Black peoples in Africa and the
diaspora, from the Gold Coast to the Mississippi Delta.14Psychically and intellectually
he was drawn to attend those same forces that produced the critical inspections of
W. E. B. Du Bois, George Padmore, and C. L. R. James. As Michel Fabre puts it:
Wright's originality, then, is that he completely understood and often reiterated. . .
that the situation of the Black in the twentieth century, and in particular during the
crucial period from the Depression to the advent of Black Power, was exceptional.
These years saw the awakening of the Third World and with it the enormous
mutation of our civilisation. "The liberation of the colored peoples of the world
is the most important event of our century," is a refrain that runs throughout
Wright's work. The same message, delivered half a century before by W. E. B. Du
Bois, did not have the same existentialist dimension.15
Wright had not created these forces that were transforming Western society, but it was
his intention to give these events a meaning independent of those interpretations
bounded by the interests of Western civilization as articulated by its intellectuals and
ideologues.
Still there are some who have argued that Wright fulfilled little of his promise.
Harold Cruse, among them, has written that Wright "was so ideologically blinded by
the smog of Jewish-Marxist nationalism that he was unable to see his own clearly";
that Wright had not understood "that the classics of Marx and Engels were written
not for the proletariat but for the intelligentsia,"16 and, finally, that "He could not
gather into himself all the ingredients of nationalism; to create values and mould
concepts by which his race was to 'struggle, live and die.' "I7
Here, then, are two of the several interpretations that attach to Wright's significance. The first places him within a tradition of radical Black thinkers. The second
expels him from that same legacy. In the following pages we shall examine which of
these two summaries of Wright's work is more appropriate.
The Novel as Politics

Richard Wright was by his work primarily a novelist. But as a novelist involved in
social action, his novels were more than a complaint against or an observation of the
human condition. Wright intended that his writing engage and confront a political
reality of movement. He was a novelist who recognized that a part of his task was to
come to terms with the character of social change and the agencies that emerged as
attempts to direct that change. His early development consciously reflected this conR I C H A R D W R I G H T A N D THE C R I T I Q U E OF CLASS THEORY

291

cern, beginning with his 1937 essay, "Blueprint for Negro Writing." In this essay we see
the first suggestions of a critical independence of thought in Wright.
Perspective . . . is that fixed point in intellectual space where a writer stands to view
the struggles, hopes, and sufferings of his people. . . . Of all the problems faced by
writers who as a whole have never allied themselves with world movements, perspective is the most difficult of achievement.18
Wright was quite openly declaring that he meant his work to reflect a committed
intellect, one informed by a political intention and the process of historical movement. He was also dedicating himself to the task that would occupy him for the
remaining 23 years of his life: the location of his "perspective" in the complex of
struggles for liberation in the Third World. As we shall see, what Wright ultimately
discovered was a psychological and intellectual locus unlike anything his experience
of Western radicalism and activism could encompass. Fortunately, a great part of his
preparation for that discovery can be found in his novels.
When we consider Richard Wright's fictional and explicitly political work, three
novels (Native Son, The Outsider, and "Island of Hallucination" this latter eventually published under the title American Hunger) and one collection of short stories
(Uncle Tom's Children) stand out. Together, these works both chronicle and interpret
Wright's experiences with American communism and political action. They also
constitute studies of Marxism as a theory of history and social revolution, of the social
and psychological development of the American working class, and of the historical
and ideological development of American Blacks. Serious attention to these works
should not be deflected by the form through which Wright sought to articulate his
ideas. Indeed, it must be recognized that his works are uniquely suited to their tasks.
Using this form, Wright could reconstruct and weight the extraordinary complexities
and subtleties of radical politics as he and others had experienced it. His characters
could live with and struggle through crises he had encountered. They could "test" the
meanings and significances he had given to those experiences. His novels were consequently much more authentic documents than the conventional forms of history,
biography, and political tract for they were constructed from lives with which he was
intimate. In these novels, Wright could achieve his intention of weaving living consciousness into the impress of social theory and ideology.19
Wright had joined the American Communist movement in the early 1930s. This
was a period that coincided with an intensification of the party's work among Blacks
following the Sixth Congress of the Comintern's "resolution on the Negro Question"
in 1928 and the beginnings of the Scottsboro trials in 1931. Wright left the party a
decade later. During those years he worked in the movement in the various capacities
of organizer, member of a Black party cell in Chicago, officer in the John Reed Clubs
and writer for the Communist press. At first, his work for the party was to take place
primarily in Chicago; later he was transferred to Harlem.lo It was, of course, during
this time that his writing was most directly influenced by the party. He proved to be

292

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

very good at it. By 1937, the year he had published "Blueprint. . .,"he had become, in
Daniel Aaron's words, "the Party's most illustrious proletarian author."21
Wright took this responsibility as a proletarian writer quite seriously. He was
committed to the task of expressingworking-class thought, consciousness,and experience. One recollection of this period is his first impression of the party: "The Communists, I felt, had oversimplified the experience of those whom they sought to lead. . . .
[Tlhey had missed the meaning of the lives of the masses."22Wright meant to put this
right, the proletariat had to be allowed its own voice. It was just as clear to him that he
carried a particular, racial responsibility toward the Black working classes:
The Negro writer who seeks to function within his race as a purposeful agent has a
serious responsibility . . . a deep, informed, and complex consciousness is necessary; a consciousness which draws for its strength upon the fluid lore of a great
people, and moulds this lore with the concepts that move and direct the forces of
history today. . . . [Tlhe Negro writer . . . is being called upon to do no less than
create values by which his race is to struggle, live and die . . . because his writing
possesses the potential cunning to steal into the inmost recesses of the human
heart, because he can create myths and symbols that inspire a faith in life.23
As a Black writer, Wright was presuming that the intelligentsia had the obligation to
construct the ideological and symbolic means through which an emerging Black
movement would be formed. Still, the work of this intelligentsia had to be grounded
in the culture of their people.
Working with these conceptions, Wright was clearly reflecting an earlier Marxian
tradition, one in which Lenin had transformed a "renegade" petit bourgeoisie into
a revolutionary vanguard.24 (Wright appears to have always opposed the Stalinist
anti-intellectualism that marked the Communist movement domestically and internationally in the 1930s.) But Wright was also mindful of a second and separate
tradition that had emerged among Blacks in the United States during the late eighteenth and mid-nineteenth centuries. At these historical moments from among the
ranks of free Blacks, there had emerged an intellectually, economically, and politically
elite class that had assumed leadership on behalf of the largely enslaved Black masses.
This nucleus later contributed significantlyto the formation of the Black middle class.
The ethos of this class and its sociohistorical traditions had been given its most
enduring name by W. E. B. Du Bois: the talented tenth.25Wright was thus suffusing
two distinct and opposing traditions. But more important, even here, while he was
ostensibly addressing Black intellectuals, he was also going about the work of recreating his world in his own ideological terms.
Wright's Social Theory

Wright, in having constructed the character of Bigger Thomas in Native Son, has been
attributed with a variety of achievements, intents, and concerns. Addison Gayle,

R I C H A R D W R I G H T A N D T H E C R I T I Q U E O F CLASS T H E O R Y

193

echoing many of his critical predecessors, argues that Wright created the archetypal
stereotype of the Black man, thus releasing American consciousness from that particular beast of burden.26Elsewhere one finds Native Son understood as "a complement of that monstrous legend it was written to destroy. Bigger is Uncle Tom's
descendant, flesh of his flesh, exactly opposite a portrait";27as a study in the psychology of the outcast;28and as a statement of the human p r e d i ~ a m e n tIn
. ~ other
~
words,
Wright's early work has been characterized by a variety of critics along a continuum
ranging between a racially specific protest to a universal declaration. It might be
useful, however, to add another and quite different dimension to Native Son-a
dimension found in Wright's own consciousness of the work.
In 1944, upon his formal declaration of leave from the American Communist Party
(the break occurred in 1942), Wright made a number of his other concerns quite
clear. Some of them had to do with the reasons he first became a part of American
radicalism.
It was not the economics of Communism, nor the great power of trade unions, nor
the excitement of underground politics that claimed me; my attention was caught
by the similarity of the experience of workers in other lands, by the possibility of
uniting scattered but kindred people into a whole. . . . [Hjere at last, in the realm of
revolutionary expression, Negro experience could find a home, a functioning value
and
Marxist propaganda suggested to him that Blacks need not be alone in their struggle
for liberation and dignity. The specter of a world proletariat, united and strong, Black
and white fascinated Wright.
Before that evening of his intellectual conversion he had looked upon the party as a
white man's organization and therefore something to be distrusted, especially in its
pretensions concerning Blacks. More important, until that moment he had dismissed
as a personal fantasy, as a painful, frustrating dream, the organization of the poor and
oppressed. Again, on that same evening-his first visit to a John Reed Club-Wright
commented, "I was meeting men and women whom I should know for decades to
come, who were to form the first sustained friendships in my life."31 He had discovered not merely an important, historical vista but someone with whom to share it.
Still, beyond the social vision of Marxism and the fraternity of American communism, Wright's decision to become a part of this movement was motivated by
one other element: the opportunity to transform himself from "passive" victim to
active advocate.
Here, then, was something that I could do, reveal, say. The Communists, I felt, had
oversimplified the experience of those whom they sought to lead. In their efforts to
recruit masses, they had missed the meaning of the lives of the masses, had conceived of people in too abstract a manner. I would try to put some of that meaning
back, I would tell Communists how common people felt, and I would tell common
people of the self-sacrifice of the Communists who strove for unity among them.32
294

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

Wright perceived his task as providing to the movement a language and images that
would give meaning to the abstracted proletariat of party ideology. This complex of
motives-vision, fraternity, and task-might seem sufficient to explain to the readers
of Uncle Tom's Children, Lawd Today, and Native Son, Wright's sociological and
political preoccupations in his early works. Yet Wright, as we shall see, was to have a
very different experience, which provided other and very different themes for the last
of these three works.
Wright had entered the party naive of its history, its factionalism, and its purgative
v o c a b ~ l a r yAs
. ~ ~we have seen, he had not been convinced earlier of the sincerity of
American Communists. This is somewhat surprising given the enormous vitality of
the party's "Negro work" at the time, work that included the defense of the Scottsboro
boys; the confrontation with conservative Black organizations; the organizing of
Unemployed Councils and Tenant Leagues; the development of the Black Belt Thesis
on self-determination and the organizing of the League of Struggle for Negro Rights
and, on the international level, the International Trade Union Committee of Negro
W0rkers.3~Though he was then a hospital worker, he had identified himself as a
writer, and as a writer, he was categorized by those in the party's ranks as an "intellectual." This meant that Wright was to be subjected to the diffidence shown to intellectuals, but, more significantly among his Black comrades, that he was also to be held
in suspicion for "petit-bourgeois tendenciesn-that is, selfish interests-and worse:
Trotskyism. The result was inevitable:
Successive disillusionments had transformed his original enthusiastic and total
dedication into wariness. His individualism was against him; he was at the mercy of
leaders like Oliver Law and Harry Haywood, ostracized from unit 205 by certain
black comrades and even denigrated.35
Invited to the party trial of another Black party member (one upon whose early
experience in the South Wright had based his short story, "Big Boy Leaves Home"),
Wright realized that the trial was also meant for someone else:
The blindness of their limited lives-lives truncated and impoverished by the
oppression they had suffered long before they had ever heard of Communismmade them think that I was with their enemies. American life had so corrupted
their consciousness that they were unable to recognize their friends when they saw
them. I know that if they had held state power I should have been declared guilty
of treason.36
He recognized among his Black co-workers an anger dammed up to the level of
destruction of self. It was not an ideology that lay at the base of their need to
physically violate errant comrades. Their dogmatism was an enveloping shield against
egocide. Their conformity was a symptom of their desperate and collective need for
each other. Wright would write later: "They're blind. . . . Their enemies have blinded
them with too much oppre~sion."~~
This, then, is the crisis that informed the development of Bigger Thomas. Native
R I C H A R D W R I G H T A N D THE C R I T I Q U E OF CLASS THEORY

295

Son was the result of Wright's resolve to have his say, his revision of American
Marxism as it emerged from the lives and practices of American Communists:
I would hurl words into this darkness and wait for an echo; and if an echo sounded,
no matter how faintly, I would send other words to tell, to march, to fight, to create
a sense of the hunger for life that gnaws in us all, to keep alive in our hearts a sense
of the inexpressibly human.38

In Native Son, Wright sought to display a more authentic, more historical, more
precise image of the proletariat to which the party had committed itself. He had
begun this task in Lawd Today and it came to fruition in the form of Bigger Thomas.
Wright, hesitant at wrestling with Marxism on theoretical terms, pursued his critique
of American Left ideology in his own terms: the novel. Bigger Thomas's lack of class
consciousness-more precisely the odyssey of his development of consciousness-is
deliberate and purposive. This was not simply a literary device, but a means of
coming to grips with the abstraction and romanticization of the proletariat that had
infected Western Communist ideology.
At the time of Wright's sojourn in the party (1934-42), the primary focus of the
movement in Western Europe and the United States was the defeat of fascism. It was a
fundamental tenet of party work that fascism was an instrument of the ruling class
designed to meet the crisis of world capitalism embodied in the Depression. As such,
fascism as an ideology was presumed to be alien to the working class. Earl Browder, as
general secretary of the American Communist Party, had made this position abunAS the official
dantly clear in reports, speeches, and articles during the late 1930s.~~
voice of the American Communist Party Browder had argued that the struggle of the
movement was preeminently a political one:
What is the message that this powerful voice of the Communist Party is giving to
America? First of all, it is the message of the need for the great mass of the people,
the workers and farmers, to organize for their own p r o t e ~ t i o n . ~ ~
Browder's strategy was a simple one: "The growth of the Communist Party is the
greatest guarantee against reaction and fascism."41
Browder's leadership had positioned the party in support of the New Deal and
Roosevelt's administration under the presumption that American workers were not
ready to confront the issue of socialism.42In effect, the party pursued the contradictory aims of reform and revolution. This was in part a consequence, as Wilhelm Reich
had pointed out with respect to the German Communist movement during the
Weimar Republic, of failing to distinguish between the abstraction of class consciousness and its specific, historical form.43Just as critically, however, the party was committed by the instructions of the Comintern to a united front with its class enemies.
For Wright the question of the consciousness of workers and consequently that of
political organization was more complex. It involved-as he was to write in defense of
Native Son-"the dark and hidden places of the human per~onality."~~
In the essay,
"How 'Bigger' Was Born," Wright had been more explicit:
296

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

the civilization which had given birth to Bigger contained no spiritual sustenance,
had created no culture which could hold and claim his allegiance and faith, had
sensitized him and had left him stranded, a free agent to roam the streets of our
cities, a hot and whirling vortex of undisciplined and unchannelized impulses.
. . . I was fascinated by the similarity of the emotional tensions of Bigger in
America and Bigger in Nazi Germany and Bigger in Old Russia. All Bigger Thomases, white and black, felt tense, afraid, nervous, hysterical, and restless. . . . [Clertain modern experiences were creating types of personalities whose existence ignored racial and national lines of d e m a r ~ a t i o n . ~ ~
Wright was attempting to come to terms with the psychological consequence of a
historical condition of which the leadership in the Communist movement was only
vaguely aware. Wright was insisting on the necessity for understanding the working
class in their own terms. He was concerned with the ability of proletarian masses to
reproduce themselves spiritually and culturally. If they could no longer re-create the
social ideologies that had sustained them, it would not be possible for them to fulfill
the historical role that Marxian theory assigned them. Moreover, the fragmentation
of personality, social relations, and ideology that Wright observed and re-created was
so total that its political and historical implications seriously challenged the presumptions of the Communist movement:
I felt that Bigger, an American product, a native son of this land, carried within him
the potentialities of either Communism or Fascism. . . . Whether he'll follow some
gaudy, hysterical leader who'll promise rashly to fill the void in him, or whether
he'll come to an understanding with the millions of his kindred fellow workers
under trade-unions or revolutionary guidance depends upon the future drift of
events in America. But. . . Bigger Thomas, conditioned as his organism is, will not
become an ardent, or even a Luke-warm, supporter of the status
He realized that no political movement that, for ideological reasons, presumed the
progressive character of the working class would succeed.
Wright's novel, subsequently, was a refutation of radical dogma from the vantage
point of Black experience. He sought first to re-create that experience, and in so doing
to force a confrontation between it and socialist ideology. Bigger Thomas's character
was specific to the historical experience of Blacks in the United States, but his nature
was proletarian, that is world-historical. When Wright gave the consciousness of
Bigger Thomas a nationalist character, he was addressing himself to both those
aspects of his creation. He wrote that he was "confronted with that part of him that
was dual in aspect . . . a part of all Negroes and all whites."47 If the American
revolutionary movement could not come to terms with the appeals of fascism, then it
could not begin to understand the immediate nature of the working class.48He agreed
with Marx that capitalism as a form of organization led to the destruction of social
consciousness founded on noncapitalist social orders. He did not accept, however, the
notion that this process led to a new ideological synthesis. The truer result, the
RlCHARD WRIGHT AND THE CRITIQUE OF CLASS THEORY

297

observed result, was "a world that existed on a plane of animal sensation alone."49The
Nazi movement succeeded because it offered in the stead of an existential terror, a
new, unambiguous social order, "the implicit, almost unconscious, or preconscious
assumptions and ideals upon which whole nations and races act and live."50
Yet Wright's analysis did not end there. He had something more to say about the
nature of revolutionary action. His analysis both underscored the absolute character
of revolutionary commitment and also spoke to Marxian class analysis.
I remember reading a passage in a book dealing with old Russia which said: "We
must be ready to make endless sacrifices if we are to be able to overthrow the
Czar." . . . Actions and feelings of men ten thousand miles from home helped me
to understand the moods and impulses of those walking the streets of Chicago
and Dixie.s1
Wright recognized in his Bigger Thomases the desperation that was the precondition
for the making of total and violent revolutionary commitments. He understood those
commitments to be less ones of choice than of compulsion. The more total the
degradation of the human being, the more total the reaction-"the need for a whole
life and acted out of that need."52
He also refused to dismiss the Bigger Thomases as lumpen-proletariat or to distinguish them from the proletariat. In Native Son he actually anticipated a thesis on
violence and the lumper-proletariat that would become better known later through
the work of Frantz Fanon. For Wright, the violence of the lumper-proletariat was not
only an objective force of revolution; violence could not be separated out from the
formation of consciousness.
"I didn't want to kill" Bigger shouted. "But what I killed for, I am."53
What, precisely, the Bigger Thomases would kill for, Wright could not answer. He had
stated his thesis and it was now left to the "future drift of events" to make that
determination, that is, the capacity of the American radical movement to develop a
critical political theory. This, of course, was not to be the case.54
Wright had emerged from the Depression with a clear and powerful image of
American society and world history. With the writing of Uncle Tom's Children and
Native Son he had extracted from the misery of poverty and imminent social collapse
an understanding of a systemic integration in which racism was a secondary, residual
phenomenon. He had no reason to doubt that the disintegration of the capitalist
world was really a promise of liberation-a promise that enveloped the whole of
humanity. Yet he possessed few illusions about this process of disintegration. He
knew, in social terms, even in human terms, that the immediate costs would be
unparalleled violence, brutality, and vengeance. At first he hoped that this historical
transformation would be surgical in its order. He believed in a conscious, deliberate,
and magnanimous workers' movement. By the time he was writing Native Son,
however, this ordered revolution had been replaced by a chaos consisting of the
collective action of a brutalized human force. The destruction of capitalism would
298

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

come at the hands of the brute social force it had itself created. Still, Wright saw this
brutalized mass as the promise of the future. Unlike Marx, Wright anticipated barbarism and socialism.
Blacks as the Negation of Capitalism

For Wright, it was not sufficient for Black liberation that his people come to terms
with the critique of capitalist society. He had observed: "Marxism is but the starting
point. No theory of life can take the place of life."55As a critique of capitalist society,
Marxism was necessary, of course, but it was ultimately an internal critique. The
epistemological nature of historical materialism took bourgeois society on its own
.~~
such,
terms, that is, presuming the primacy of economic forces and s t r ~ c t u r e sAs
the historical development from feudalism of the bourgeoisie as a class served as a
logical model for the emergence of the proletariat as a negation of capitalist society.57
Wright appeared quite early to have understood this thesis as a fundamental error in
Marxist thought. Even as early as 1937, he had begun to argue that it was necessary
that Blacks transform the Marxist critique into an expression of their own emergence
as a negation of Western capitalism.
Though immersed in the American radical movement with its Eurocentric ideology, it had not taken Wright very long to reach the conclusion that the historic
development of Black people in the United States constituted the most total contradiction to Western capitalist society:58
The workers of a minority people, chafing under exploitation, forge organisational
forms of struggle. . . . Lacking the handicaps of false ambition and property, they
have access to a wide social vision and a deep social consciousness. . . . Their
organizations show greater strength, adaptability, and efficiency than any other
group or class in society.
Wright assumed that the alienation of Black workers from American society was
more total than that experienced by the "white" working classes formed in Europe
and America. This, indeed, was the more profound significance of Black nationalism,
and one with which the Black intellectual had to come to terms:
[Tlhe emotional expression of group-feeling which puzzles so many whites and
leads them to deplore what they call "black chauvinism" is not a morbidly inherent
trait of the Negro, but rather the reflex expression of a life whose roots are imbedded deeply in Southern soil. Negro writers must accept the nationalist implications of their lives. . . . [Tlhey must accept the concept of nationalism because, in
order to transcend it, they must possess and understand it. And a nationalist spirit
in Negro writing means a nationalism carrying the highest possible pitch of social
consciousness. It means a nationalism that knows its origins, its limitations, that is
aware of the dangers of its position, that knows its ultimate aims are unrealisable
within the framework of capitalist America; a nationalism whose reason for being
RICHARD WRIGHT A N D THE CRITIQUE OF CLASS THEORY

299

lies in the simple fact of self-possession and in the consciousness of the interdependence of people in modern society.59
Wright's argument and its language strongly suggest the elements within the party
with which he was in ideological conflict. In using the phrase "black chauvinismn-its
second element being a term used most frequently within the party as a more objective interpretation for what was commonly referred to as nationalism-Wright designated his first target: white Marxian ideologues. His second target, deracinated Black
intellectuals,were addressed as the recipients of a new history. They had to be made to
realize that Black nationalism was an initial and historically logical stage of a more
profoundly universal consciousness.
Wright was arguing that American Blacks had been re-created from their African
origins by an oppressive system of capitalist exploitation that had at one and the same
time integrated them into the emergent organization of industrial production while
suspending them from the full impact of bourgeois ideology. Perhaps Wright put this
most succinctly several years later in The Outsiderwhen Ely Houston, one of Wright's
two spokesmen in the novel, observed:
The way Negroes were transported to this country and sold into slavery, then
stripped of their tribal culture and held in bondage; and then allowed so teasingly
and over so long a period of time, to be sucked into our way of life is something
which resembles the rise of all men. . . .
They are outsiders and. . . [tlhey are going to be self-conscious;they are going to
be gifted with a double vision, for, being Negroes, they are going to be both inside
and outside of our culture at the same time. . . . Negroes will develop unique and
specially defined psychological types. They will become psychological men, like the
Jews. . . . They will not only be Americans or Negroes; they will be centers of
knowing, so to speak. . . . The political, social, and psychological consequences of
this will be enormous.60
Wright believed that racism, the very character of the system by which Black workers
had been exploited, had mediated their internalization of the ruling ideas of American society. He went on to assert that, unlike the dominant sectors of European and
Euro-American proletariats, the Black proletariat-historically from the legal and
political disciplines of slavery to its peculiar condition as free wage labor-had developed a psychic and cultural identity independent from bourgeois ideology. This
construction of Wright's pushed the insights of Du Bois61and others far beyond the
critique of Black-white labor solidarity. What Wright was suggesting went even beyond the most extreme position in the 1930s of American radicals that Blacks were the
vanguard of the American working class.62
Wright was asserting that the Black revolutionary movement, in the process of transcending a chauvinistic nationalism, was emerging as a historical force that would
challenge the very foundation of Western civilization:

300

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

Reduced to its simplest terms, theme for Negro writers will rise from understanding the meaning of their being transplanted from a "savage" to a "civilized"
culture in implications. It means that Negro writers must have in their consciousness the fore-shortened picture of the whole, nourishing culture from which they
were torn in Africa, and of the long, complex (and for the most part, unconscious)
struggle to regain in some form and under alien conditions of life a whole culture again.63
For Wright, it was at precisely this point, in the culture's ideational, conceptual, and
ideological extension, that the writer and other intellectuals are required. In the
construction of myths and symbols emergent from the experience of Black people,
the responsibility of the intellectuals was "to create values by which [their] race is to
struggle, live and die." This is precisely the task Wright was assuming sixteen years
later in The Outsider.
The Outsideras a Critique of
Christianity and Marxism

The Outsider was completed several years after Wright had left the American Communist movement. It was received, however, as a further elaboration of Wright's
reason for his
Yet the novel's treatment of the party was less in the tradition
of Chester Himes's vitriolic Lonely Crusade or Ralph Ellison's satiric The Invisible Man
than in that of Arthur Koestler's Darkness at Noon.65Though Wright did develop in
The Outsider a critique of the American Left's race politics and of Stalinism, his intent
was much broader, his object much more far ranging.
The novel is a parable. It is a moral, philosophic, and political exercise. Like the
myth in phatic groups, the purpose is to demonstrate the terrible consequence to the
human spirit as well as to social organization of a total exorcizing of social ideology.
In White Man Listen, Wright would declare:
I maintain that the ultimate effect of white Europe upon Asia and Africa was to cast
millions into a kind of spiritual void; I maintain that it suffused their lives with a
sense of meaninglessness. I argue that it was not merely physical suffering or
economic deprivation that has set over a billion and a half colored people in violent
political motion. . . . The dynamic concept of the void that must be filled, a void
created by a thoughtless and brutal impact of the West upon a billion and a half
people, is more powerful than the concept of class conflict, and more universal.66
Without myths, that is, without meaning, consciousness is set adrift into terror. The
desperation that is the condition of this degree of alienation (or Max Scheler's ressentiment, or Husserl's "crisis")67inevitably requires violence. Violence is the final, the
last possible form that social action may assume.
Moreover, Wright was demonstrating both the necessity and inevitability of ideol-

R I C H A R D W R I G H T A N D THE C R I T I Q U E OF CLASS THEORY

301

ogy and its arbitrariness. No matter what meanings ideologies systematize, they are
always subject to the abuses of power. When ideology is used for the purpose of
domination, it must be opposed, not by a counterideology but by the negation of
ideology: theory. In short, he was making the case for the necessity for a critical
commitment, the sort of commitment that achieves its purpose by extraction from
the historical legacy: the culture of a people. Such a commitment is made possible
only through a consciousness capable of re-creating meaning.
In The Outsider, Wright sought to subvert the two ideological and philosophic
traditions at the heart of modern Western culture. First, he ridiculed the JudeoChristian tradition by creating a protagonist whose very name is contradiction: Cross
Damon-the demon Christ. Cross Damon has escaped Judeo-Christian morality
through the recognition of its operative psychic force: a destructive, debilitating
dread-guilt. Just as Marx earlier had recognized that religion (that is Judaism) "is the
sigh of the oppressed creature, the sentiment of a heartless world, and the soul of
soulless condition^,"^^ Wright had perceived the truer historical significance of Christianity among Blacks as not an instrument of domination but as a philosophic
adaptation to oppression.
Moreover, he understood the resignation of Black Christianity as only one element
in the culture of Blacks. In Black music, another more strident voice existed opposing
that guilt:
[Tlhis music was the rhythmic flauntings of guilty feelings, the syncopated outpourings of frightened joy existing in guises forbidden and despised by others. . . .
Negroes had been made to live in but not of the land of their birth. . . . [Tlhe
injunctions of an alien Christianity and the strictures of white laws had evoked in
them the very longings and desires that that religion and law had been designed to
stifle. . . . [Bllue-jazzwas a rebel art blooming seditiously under the condemnations
of a Protestant ethic. . . . Blue-jazz was the scornful gesture of men turned ecstatic
in their state of rejection . . . the recreations of the innocently criminal.69
The forces of science and technology and the processes of the proletarianization of
Black workers were orchestrating the supercession of Black Christian resignation by
this second, derisively angry, consciousness.
Yet Wright was also critical of Marxism, the second and more modern radical
Western tradition. It, too, was profoundly limited theoretically, and subject to the
abuses of narrow political interests. Marxism had ultimately failed to come to terms
with nationalism, with consciousness, with racism, with Western civilization, with
industrialization, and with the history of Blacks. Wright had already demonstrated
some of its limitations in Native Son. Daniel Aaron, commenting on Bigger Thomas's
Communist lawyer, had observed, "Even Boris Max never really understands Bigger,
and is frightened by Bigger's vision of him~elf."'~
Wright made this same point even
more tellingly in The Outsider. Wright maintained that the purposes of Marxism as
employed in American Communism were less analytical than political. The result was
neither theory nor praxis but the achievement of power. Ironically, in the second
302

BLACK RADICALISM A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

novel, it was the character of Hilton, also a party functionary, who spoke for Wright.
Hilton, driven to candor by desperation, betrays the crude agreement upon which
party support of Black liberation depended: manipulation. Wright (Cross) then reflects to himself:
Did the average white American suspect that men like Hilton existed, men who
could easily rise above the racial hatred of the mob and cynically make use of the
defensive attitudes instilled in Negroes as weapons in their own bitter struggle for
power?71
But Wright would instruct us never to expect to hear such revelations as Hilton's. He
had heard them as a part of his experience, an experience that he would subject to the
Marxian critique that was now also a part of his way of grappling with reality.
Marxism as an ideology and theory of history, Wright argued, was a product of a
petit bourgeoisie, in particular, the intellectuals:
You must assume that I know what this is all about. Don't tell me about the nobility
of labor, the glorious future. You don't believe in that. That's for others, and you
damn well know it. . . . You Jealous Rebels are intellectuals who know your history
and you are anxious not to make the mistakes of your predecessors in rebellious
undertaking^.^^
He was no longer convinced that Marxism as a theory, as a theory of history or social
revolution, was correct but he did understand its seductiveness. He would write in
1960: "Marxist ideology in particular is but a transitory make-shift pending a more
accurate diagnosis. . . . Communism may be but a painful compromise containing a
definition of man by sheer default."73He suspected that Marxism, alike with Christianity as an ideology, masked "complexities of history and social experience." Its
truer function was the social and intellectual cohesion of the petit bourgeoisie-a
class very different from the proletariat:
[Olne minority section of the white society in or under which he lives will offer the
educated elite of Asia and Africa or black America an interpretation of the world
which impels to action, thereby assuaging his feelings of inferiority. Nine times out
of ten it can be easily pointed out that the ideology offered has no relation to the
plight of the educated black, brown, or yellow elite. . . . But that ideology does solve
something. . . . [I]t enabled the Negro or Asian or African to meet revolutionary
fragments of the hostile race on a plane of equality.74
Still, in this his most devastating criticism of Communism, Wright was relying on a
notion of class struggle:
These men who rise to challenge the rulers are jealous men. They feel that they are
just as good as the men who rule; indeed, they suspect that they are better. They see
the countless mistakes that are being made by the men who rule and they think that
they could do a more honest, a much cleaner job, a more efficient
RICHARD W R I G H T A N D THE CRITIQUE OF CLASS THEORY

303

Such was Wright's thesis on the development of Marxism as a class-specific ideology.
And in some ways, he was echoing Marx's own but more mystical explanation of
Marxism:
Finally, in times when the class struggle nears the decisive hour, the process of
dissolution going on within the ruling class, in fact within the whole range of
society, assumes such a violent, glaring character, that a small section of the ruling
class cuts itself adrift, and joins the revolutionary class, the class that holds the
future in its hand . . . so now a portion of the bourgeoisie goes over to the
proletariat, and in particular, a portion of the bourgeois ideologists, who have
raised themselves to the level of comprehending theoretically the historical movement as a
By the early i95os, Wright had come to his similar conclusion-one that we have seen
he retained for the rest of his life-but with a different meaning: Marxist theory was
an expression of petit bourgeois consciousness and its critique of bourgeois society
and capitalism was most fundamentally addressed to that class's suffocation by the
authority of the bourgeois ruling class.
Yet the opposition of Marxist theory to capitalist society was useful to Wright,
theoretically. Indeed, the historical and revolutionary role that Wright assigned to
Blacks had at its base a materialist dialectic. As previously indicated, Wright recognized Black nationalism as a product, in part, of both the objective necessities of
capitalist development and accumulation, and its system of exploitation. As he turned
toward the ideology of Black nationalism, he sought to comprehend its emergence in
the contradictions of day-to-day experience:
[Elvery day in this land some white man is cussing out some defenseless Negro. But
that white bastard is too stupid to realise that his actions are being duplicated a
million times in a million other spots by other whites who feel hatred for Negroes
just like he does. He's too blind to see that this daily wave of a million tiny assaults
builds up a vast reservoir of resentment in N e g r ~ e s . ~ ~
Thus Wright echoed another powerful contribution to the development of Marxism:
Hegel's the Cunning of Reason.
But where Wright differed most with others who could employ a Marxist approach
was in his characterization of the historical forces of ideology. Ideology was the
special political instrument of the petit bourgeoisie. Wright was arguing that the
renegades of this class that had served historically to produce the dominant ideas
of the bourgeoisie, had themselves become contemptuous of the ruling class. The
Jealous Rebels had declared, as Marx himself had written: "the bourgeoisie is unfit
any longer to be the ruling class in society, and to impose its conditions of existence
upon society as an overriding law. It is unfit to rule because it is i n c ~ m p e t e n t . " ~ ~
In his criticisms of Marxism, then, Wright was not entirely rejecting it but was
attempting to locate it, to provide a sense of the boundaries of its authority. As a
theory of society, he found it dissatisfying, indeed, reductionist. By itself it was insuffi304

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

ciently prescient of the several levels of collective consciousness. As an ideology, he
recognized that it had never transcended its origins. It remained an ideology for the
worlung classes rather than an ideology of the working classes. However, as a method
of social analysis he found it compelling. He had not abandoned the conception of
the relations of production as a basis for the critique of capitalist society nor the
importance of the class relations of production. Still, the critique of capitalism was
only the beginning of the struggle for liberation.
It is from this critical perspective that Wright joins with one of the few Black
women he has sympathetically drawn, Sarah Hunter. When she cajoles her husband,
Bob, the frightened and party-subservient Black organizer, she is speaking for Wright:
"everywhere I've looked . . . I've seen nothing but white folks kicking niggers who are
kneeling down." "I want to be one of them who tells the others to obey, see? Read your
Marx and organize."79
From his experience in the American Communist Party, and from his reading of
Marx, Wright had come to the conclusion that no people's liberation is the result of
their abject surrender of critical judgment. Certainly it was not the prerogative of
Black intellectuals to surrender the cultural heritage of their people: the emergent
revolutionary consciousness of Black nationalism.
Very little remains then of the Wright that Harold Cruse presents to us. Perhaps,
like Baldwin, Cruse had also felt the need "to kill the father." Doubtless, too, the
explanation for Cruse's error is much more complex. But irrespective ofthe origins of
Cruse's portrait of Wright, a closer reading of the central works written by Wright
over a span of more than two decades reveals a most powerful and self-possessed
Black thinker. Wright struggled toward a synthesis of Marxism and Black nationalist
thought to match those of his colleagues, George Padmore and C. L. R. James. And
together, their several works-along with those of Du Bois-are an extraordinary
legacy to Blacks in the Western hemisphere and elsewhere. In them, one can discover
an independent and richly suggestive critique of the modern world-a critique whose
voice is the most authentic sounding of the brutal depths of Western civilization and
its history. There lies, in those works, the beginnings of Black revolutionary theory.
"[Alt the moment when a people begin to realize a meaning in their suffering, the
civilization that engenders that suffering is doomed."s0

R I C H A R D W R I G H T A N D THE CRITIQUE OF CLASS T H E O R Y

305

ized Black radical intelligentsia first began the formulation of Black radical theory.
The terrain was not made by choice but dictated by historical inheritance.
When the investigation into the conflicts extant between Western radicalism and
the struggle for Black liberation was initiated, it was with the gnawing intuition that
something known to be fundamental to the Western experience was being trivialized
by the American radical tradition. Among my colleagues there was the sense that
something so important as to challenge the very foundations of progressive politics
and thought lay beyond the conceptualizations that admittedly had inspired formidable displays of progressive work and activity. Some knowledge, some aspect of Black
consciousness was unaccounted for in the Marxist explication of the historical processes and source of the motives to which were attributed the social formations of the
modern world. In its conceptually formidable reaction against irresponsible power,
calculated social destruction, and the systematic exploitation of human beings, there
seemed to us to be a discernible reluctance in Western radicalism, or to put it more
strongly, a flight from the recognition that something more than objective material
forces were responsible for "the nastiness" as Peter Blackman puts it. There was the
sense that something of a more profound nature than the obsession with property
was askew in a civilization that could organize and celebrate-on a scale beyond
previous human experience-the brutal degradations of life and the most acute
violations of human destiny. It seemed a certainty that the system of capitalism was
part of it, but as well symptomatic of it. It needed a name as the philosopher Hobbes
might say. It was not simply a question of outrage or concern for Black survival. It was
a matter of comprehension.
The outrage, I believe, was most certainly informed by the Africanity of our consciousness-some epistemological measure culturally embedded in our minds that
deemed that the racial capitalism we have been witness to was an unacceptable
standard of human conduct. It was also the case that the source of our outrage
characterized that conduct as inexplicable. The depths to which racialist behavior has
fouled Western agencies transgressed against a world-consciousness rooted in our
African past. Nevertheless, the sense of deep sadness at the spectacle of Western racial
oppression is shared with other non-Western peoples. In these circumstances and in a
certain sense only, Black survival must of course be taken as problematical. But its
truer significance has been determined by received tradition.
I have said that the inquiry into what lay behind the sense of the inadequacies ofthe
Marxian critique was compelled by the question of understanding. The encounter
between African and European had been abrupt, not so much in historical terms as in
philosophical ones. The Western civilization that burst forth from its medieval quarantine prosecuted its racial sense of social order, its feudal habits of domination, with
a vengeance. By the ending of the Middle Ages, racialism was a routine manifestation,
finding expression even in the more exotic mental recesses of the maniac and hysterical. For 400 years, from the fifteenth to the nineteenth century, while the capitalist
mode of production in Europe engulfed agrarian and artisanal workers, transforming
them over the generations into expropriated, dependent fodder for concentration in
308

B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

factories, disciplined to the rhythms and turbulences of the manufacturing process,
the organizers of the capitalist world system appropriated Black labor power as
consfant capital. Blacks were extracted from their social formations through mechanisms that, by design and historical coincidence, minimized the disruption of the
production of labor. While vast reserves of labor were amassed in the Poor Houses
and slums of Europe's cities and manufacturing towns and villages, in the African
hinterland some semblance of traditional life continued to reproduce itself, sharing
its social product-human beings-with the Atlantic slave system. For those African
men and women whose lives were interrupted by enslavement and transportation, it
was reasonable to expect that they would attempt, and in some ways realize, the recreation of their lives. It was not, however, an understanding of the Europeans that
preserved those Africans in the grasp of slavers, planters, merchants, and colonizers.
Rather, it was the ability to conserve their native consciousness of the world from
alien intrusion, the ability to imaginatively re-create a precedent metaphysic while
being subjected to enslavement, racial domination, and repression. This was the raw
material of the Black radical tradition, the values, ideas, conceptions, and constructions of reality from which resistance was manufactured. And in each instance of
resistance, the social and psychological dynamics that are shared by human communities in long-term crises resolved for the rebels the particular moment, the collective
and personal chemistries that congealed into social movement. But it was the materials constructed from a shared philosophy developed in the African past and transmitted as culture, from which revolutionary consciousness was realized and the
ideology of struggle formed.
As we have commented, though rebellion might appear warranted to the Europeans who witnessed the uprisings of African peoples, the forms that Black resistance
assumed were incomprehensible. Ultimately many such witnesses fell easily into
whatever language was on hand to evoke mystery: the participants in Black resistance
were seen as having reverted to savagery; were under the influence of satanic madmen; had passed beyond the threshold of sanity. To the Europeans charged with the
responsibilities of preserving the sources of Black labor or control over that labor, the
only effective response to Black rebellion was massive, indiscriminate violence and
afterward the routine of brutality. More frequently than not, the logic of racial
domination that had already endured for centuries invoked no alternatives. On this
score it had always to be an unequal contest, not because of the superiority of
weapons or the preponderance of numbers but because such violence did not come
naturally to African peoples. The civilizations of Europe and Africa in those terms
had also been very different. For far longer than a millennium, the history of Europe
had amounted to an almost uninterrupted chronology of fratricidal warfare and its
celebration. The museums of the civilization are the current testament to that preoccupation, its histories chilling accounts. In Africa, where the incident of state and
imperial formations and total warfare were rarer, conflict could and was more frequently resolved by migration and resettlement. Eventually the penetration of Islam
into Africa and the organization of the Red Sea and Mediterranean slave systems had
A N ENDING

309

made some real difference but it was the scale of the Atlantic slave trade and the racial
cacophony of European colonialism that would dictate the more profound adjustment to violence. And this too was misunderstood by the Europeans, translated as
might be expected into the discourse of superior and inferior races. While the European ruling classes humbled their own workers by force and cultural hegemony, the
points of contact between Europeans and Blacks were enveloped by violence.
The first forms of struggle in the Black radical tradition, however, were not structured by a critique of Western society but from a rejection of European slavery and a
revulsion of racism in its totality. Even then, the more fundamental impulse of Black
resistance was the preservation of a particular social and historical consciousness
rather than the revolutionary transformation of feudal or merchant capitalist Europe.
Why the pathology of race was so dominant a part of Western consciousness or what
might be done to change that character was of less concern than how Black peoples
might survive the encounter. This perhaps is part of the explanation of why, so often,
Black slave resistance naturally evolved to marronage as the manifestation of the
African's determination to disengage, to retreat from contact. To reconstitute the
community, Black radicals took to the bush, to the mountains, to the interior.
Just as in Africa until the last quarter of the nineteenth century retreat had been a
possible response of African peoples, it was similarly the case at the sites of slave labor.
In the Caribbean islands as well as in Latin America and North America, Black
peoples found means of disengagement. Away from the plantations, in the security of
mountain retreats, on the continent toward the up-country sources of the great rivers
that emptied into the ocean at the coasts, Black communities could be reestablished.
And the very existence of such settlements enhanced the morale of those who remained in captivity. Over the generations, the successive depositions of new labor, the
maroon settlements, and the legends of such communities further enriched the radical tradition. And each generation among the slaves contributed to the further broadening of Black consciousness and the ideology of the tradition. And while the trade
itself expanded in response to the interactions of exchange, commodity-demands and
surplus production in the world system, within the slave communities a Black people
evolved. Manifest expressions of Black radicalism such as marronage, arson, the
destruction of work tools, and even open rebellion were complemented by less overt
forms. When separation was not possible, open revolts might fester; where rebellion
was immediately impractical, the people prepared themselves through obeah, voodoo, Islam, and Black Christianity. Through these they induced charismatic expectations, socializing and hardening themselves and their young with beliefs, myths, and
messianic visions that would allow them, someday, to attempt the impossible. Their
history confirmed these processes; their fruition could be seen in the papaloi of the
Haitian Revolution; the obeah men and women who crowd the trial records of slave
rebellions in the Caribbean and elsewhere; the Muslim revolts in Brazil; the rebel
preachers who appear at the center of resistance in Jamaica, Suriname, and North
America. Through it all, of course, the perturbations of the world system constituted
the parameters, the conditions of being of Black resistance.
310 B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

In seventeenth-century colonial North America, marronage appeared first. But as
the eighteenth century succeeded the seventeenth, marronage as the prevalent form
of Black resistance became increasingly difficult, as merchant and manufacturing
capitalists expanded plantation slavery, rationalized the structures of domination between the colonies, and defeated the native Americans. As slave communities formed,
marronage was eventually superseded. By the middle of the eighteenth century, for
the mass of Blacks the steady transfusion, via the Atlantic, of new Africans, the genius
of Black Christianity, the construction of Creole dialects, the founding of Black and
Seminole-like maroon communities, the flight to the Black quarters of southern
cities, the plotting and actualizing of rebellions, and the construction of familial and
communal relations in the slave quarters, were all a part of their preservation as an
African people and the nurture of the Black radical tradition. On the other hand, the
drift toward assimilation to the Europeans by a fraction of the Black population was
of little importance. The crude racialism that walled American culture exacted a toll
that only the most desperately alienated at the racial and psychological margins of the
Black and white societies could be expected to pay. By the end of the century, new
possibilities for Black radicalism arose with first the colonial rebellion and then the
Haitian Revolution. Blacks fought with the English against the rebels and witnessed
the more relevant resistance in Haiti. And well into the nineteenth century, the
experience absorbed by Black participants in the rebellion of the colonial ruling class
against its English superiors and the example (and the indirect if not direct assistance)
of the Haitian revolutionists facilitated mass resistance as the dominant expression of
Black radicalism. Like the Haitian slaves, disengagement was the ideological currency
of the rebel American Blacks; the absolute rejection of American society and the
persistent denunciation of racialism as a basis of civilized conduct. Before the Civil
War, with slave production now more important economically than it had ever been
as a direct result of the industrial revolutionizing of English manufacturing, the Black
radical commitment was echoed by the ideologists of the slave rebellions and the
Black refugees from slavery. It was given expression among the militant Black "abolitionists," in the assemblies of the emigration movement, and among Blacks such
as the Chatham conventioneers who, with John Brown, planned the overthrow of
the slave system. The evidence of the tradition's persistence and ideological vitality
among the Black slave masses was to be found not only in the rebellions and the
underground but as well in the shouts, the spirituals, the sermons, and the very
textual body of Black Christianity. After the Civil War, in the wake of the years of
fighting and the subsequent years ofbeing victimized by terror and the manipulations
of the industrial, financial, and plantocratic classes, streams of Black emigrationists
sought again the safety of distance. In the late nineteenth century, like their migrating
counterparts in South Africa, Brazil, and Cuba who desperately sought for distance
from European settlements, American Blacks were convinced anew that their preservation as a people was at stake. The possibilities of that option, however, were already
receding. New conditions, new resolves, and new stratagems were overtaking them.
The formal endings of slave systems of production in the nineteenth century
A N ENDING

311

marked the beginnings of a profound reorganization of the capitalist world system. In
Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Americas, through the deepening penetrations of monopoly capitalism and the impositions of hegemonic colonialisms, slaves were displaced as a source of cheap labor power by peasants and migrant laborers. In Africa,
whereas the slave trade had dislocated the reproductive cycles of certain social formations along the coasts of West and southern Africa, the "new imperialism" of monopoly capitalism demanded a more destructive form of appropriation and exploitation.
The colonial state parasitized the peasants of the continent's agrarian hinterlands,
transforming traditional economic sectors from the project of reproduction into the
source and support of forcibly recruited labor and the sites of cash-crop monoculture
and the extraction of minerals and raw materials. To the extent that wage labor
expanded in Africa, its level of support was limited to maintenance and not reproduction of labor. In the New World there were also changes. The systems of reconstitution of Black communities were, as well, assaulted by forms of forced labor: peonage,
share-cropping, and less than subsistence farming. Moreover, Black workers were
subject to displacement from productive land and to publicly and privately organized
campaigns of terror and intimidation. Ineluctably, resistance was propelled toward
new forms, new consciousness, and new ideologies.
The anticolonial struggles that were increasinglymounted from the mid-nineteenth
century on were the beginnings of the transformation of Black radicalism into an
engaged confrontation with European domination. Indeed, it was as a response to the
mass resistances to colonialism that the other human contradictions to which colonial
domination was inherently vulnerable were catalyzed. The very nature of colonial
dominance required the adaptation or creation of privileged strata among the dominated people. And from the conflict, which was inevitable between the native "bourgeoisie" and their colonial masters, a renegade intelligentsiawas induced, one to which
the idea of a total opposition, a nationalist confrontation and critique of Western
societywas necessary and natural. The experience of the Black petit bourgeoisies, their
intimacy with European power, culture, society, and racism, and their contradictory
relations to them, in time drew from their number nationalists and radical nationalists. While the nationalists generally confined their attentions to the struggles at home
where their ambitions could most immediately be realized, the radical nationalists
were really internationalists, settling into variants of Pan-Africanism or socialism.
Invariably, some of the radicals would be ideologically attracted to the opposition
movements gestated within Western society itself. Their ambivalencetoward the Black
masses, their social and psychological identifications with European culture made
the analytical and theoretical authority of European socialism an almost irresistible
political ideology. For some that proved sufficient. For others, however, the continuing formation of militant nationalist and workers' movements in the colonial
world raised questions about the breadth and acuity of European socialists. And as
mass Black radicalism adapted to the instrument of people's wars as the form of the
anti-imperialist struggle, its revolutionary intelligentsia began the critique or relocation of socialist theory. For them, the struggles of the European working classes were
312 B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T T H E O R Y

linked with the anti-imperialist movements of the nonindustrial world. The gulf
between class struggle and anti-imperialist and nationalist activity began to be closed.
In the Caribbean and North America (where a racial politics analogous to that of
colonialism had produced a complementary Black radical intelligentsia), when for
much of the first half of the twentieth century the crises of monopoly capitalism
struck the world system, a generation of these ideologues was already formed and
ready to respond to the social upheavals in Europe, America, and the colonial world.
Others affixed themselves to socialist movements after the rebellions of European
workers had subsided and bourgeois democracy, the liberal representation of monopoly capitalism from its infancy, gave way in Italy, Germany, and Spain to the more
openly repressive face of the fascist state. To the colonial and American Black radicals,
the objections raised to fascism by liberal and socialist ideologues brought to the fore
the parallels between colonialism and fascism and the ambivalence, hypocrisies, and
impotence of the intellectuals in the metropoles of the European empires. Many of
the leading activists among the Black intelligentsia, having previously committed
themselves to drawing their nationalist struggles within the orbit of the socialist
movement, found it necessary to move past their European comrades. It was both
natural and historically logical that some would resurrect Pan-Africanism as a radical
ideology and recognize further its potential as a radical theory of struggle and history.
From the early 1930s on, a radical Pan-Africanism emerged. And in the work of Du
Bois, James, and Wright, of Oliver Cox, Eric Williams, and George Padmore, the
elements of its first phase were discernible.
When Du Bois and James set about the recovery of the history of the revolutionary
Black struggle, they were driven from an implied to an explicit critique of Marxism.
As Black men grown sensitive to the day-to-day heroism demanded for Black survival, they were particularly troubled by the casual application of preformed categories to Black social movements. It appeared to them that Western Marxists, unconsciously bound by a Eurocentric perspective, could not account for nor correctly
assess the revolutionary forces emerging from the Third World. The racial metaphysics of Western consciousness-the legacy of a civilization-shielded their fellow
socialists from the recognition of racialism's influence on the development and structures of the capitalist system, and conceptually pardoned them from a more acute
inquiry into the categories of their own thought. Without some form of intervention,
the socialist movement would be doomed to disaster.
The first initiative of Du Bois, who himself had been matured by his encounter
with American Black nationalism, was to reassess the historical role of the industrial
working classes. In the beginning he had intended a modest proposal: without the aid
of the Black masses, no American working-class movement could succeed in overturning the capitalist ruling class. However, his investigation of the Black radical
tradition of the mid-nineteenth century pushed his analysis further and deeper,
beyond the presumptions of the revolutionary theory and politics of his time. Anticipating the more sustained expositions of Eric Williams and Oliver Cox, Du Bois
became convinced that capitalism and slavery were related systemically; that monopA N ENDING

313

oly capitalism had extended rather than arrested that relationship; and that the forces
implicated in the dissolution of capitalism could emerge from the contradictions of
that relationship. History provided his evidence. In the turbulence of the American
Civil War and a social revolution carried through by the mobilized slaves and the
white agrarian workers, it had been the manufacturing and industrial working classes
that had hesitated, drawn to counterrevolution by racism and a short-sighted perception of their class interest. The class struggle had been distorted and a proletarian
revolutionary consciousness among nineteenth-century American workers had been
effectively interdicted by the ideological power of racism and the seductiveness of the
bourgeois myth of social mobility. It was the slaves (in truth an enslaved peasantry)
and other agrarian workers who had mounted the attack on capitalism. It was, Du
Bois observed, from the periphery and not the center that the most sustained threat to
the American capitalist system had materialized. The rebellious slaves, vitalized by a
world-consciousness drawn from African lore and composing their American experience into a rebellious art, had constituted one of the crucial social bases in contradiction to bourgeois society. For Du Bois, the recovery of this last fact became as
elementary to revolutionary theory as a recognition of the peasant masses whose
revolts in Russia, Mexico, and China had rocked the ruling classes of the twentieth
century. Just as important for him, however, was the realization that the racism of the
American "white" working classes and their general ideological immaturity had abnegated the extent to which the conditions of capitalist production and relations
alone could be held responsible for the social development of the American proletariat. The collective and individual identities of American workers had responded
as much to race as they had to class. The relations of production were not determinant. Du Bois would pursue this issue politically but not theoretically. Nevertheless, it
had become clear to him that in Marxist theory much uncertainty remained with
respect to the significance that could be made of the historical appearance of the
proletarian class under capitalism and the evolution of working-class consciousness.
In the reconstruction of the Haitian Revolution, James in his way reached even
deeper into the Black radical tradition and into the issue of its resolution within
Marxism. More an internationalist than even Du Bois, notwithstanding the latter's
broad experience and wide concerns, James had intellectually absorbed the conflicting traditions associated with the cultural raison d'Ctre of Victorian imperialism, the
doctrines of Marxist-Leninism, and the nascent radical nationalism of colonial Trinidad. But as an ideologue of the Fourth International movement he had been led to a
rigorous critique of them all and a rejection of any easy accommodation. Concurring
with Du Bois's intuition that Western radicalism had indulged a tendency to peripheralize the antiracist and anti-imperialist struggles, James attempted a theoretical
reconciliation of the Black and Western radical traditions. With the Russian Revolution in mind, he framed the Haitian Revolution against the Bolshevik model. But his
attempt to lend Marxian authority to the slave revolutionists forced to the surface an
unintended consideration. While he might suspend the disquieting realization that
the revolution had occurred in the absence of those conditions and the particular
314

B L A C K R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

consciousness that Marxian theory determined necessary for a modern social revolution, he could not avoid a kindred problem: the reevaluation of the nature and the
historical role of the revolutionary petit bourgeois intelligentsia and its presumptions. For a decade after the appearance of The Black Jacobins, James would wrestle
with the social and ideological ambivalence of this "renegade" strata, eventually
articulating a critique of it as the source of leadership of the revolutionary masses. In
Haiti as well as in Russia, Lenin's theory of "the dictatorship of the proletariat" had
been shown to be insufficient. No revolutionary cadre, divorced from the masses,
ensconced in state bureaucracy, and abrogating to itself the determination of the best
interests of the masses, could sustain the revolution or itself. James would come to the
theoretical position that "in the decisive hour" (as Marx and Engels were wont to say)
it was only the consciousness and activity of the revolutionary masses that could
preserve the revolution from compromise, betrayal, or the ill-considered usurpation
of revolutionary authority. It was his study of the revolutionary masses of Haiti,
France, Russia and Africa, and his work in England, America and Trinidad rather
than the Bolshevik state that would persuade him of the actual fact of Lenin's dictum:
"every cook can govern."
But it was Richard Wright who was better placed than either Du Bois, James,
Padmore, Williams, or Cox to articulate the revolutionary consciousness of the Black
masses and to assess the cultural debilitation of Marxian politics. Wright had as his
vantage points his origins in the rural and urban Black working classes and his
experience of the American Communist movement. Unlike Du Bois who came to
Black cultural life from its margins and would stand at a distance to describe the
revolutionary ideas of the American slaves as a mixture of legend, whimsy, and art,
and unlike James whose appreciation of Black culture was often cerebral ("the medium" is how James would describe the voodoo ideology of the Haitian revolutionists, and the calypso of the West Indian masses) when not single-minded (about
cricket and the novels of his age-mates and peers), Wright evoked in his writings the
language and experience of "ordinary" Black men and women. In this way he pressed
home the recognition that whatever the objective forces propelling a people toward
struggle, resistance, and revolution, they would come to that struggle in their own
cultural terms. Among Blacks, a culture of a mass conscious of itself had evolved from
African civilization, the centuries of resistance to slavery, and the opposition to a
racial social order. In the syncopations and the phrases, the scamp and the beat, the
lyric and melody of Black language, Black beliefs, Black music, sexual and social
relations and encounters, Wright's work reconstructed the resonances of Black American consciousness in its contests with reality. The quests pursued in his novels and
essays were set to the improvisational possibilities obtained in that Black culture's
collisions with its own parameters and those prescribed by the market forces and
labor demands of capitalism and by a racialist culture. From the measured discourse
of a Black culture he illustrated the limits of a socialist movement that persisted in too
many abstractions, too far removed, and was prey to the arrogance of racial paternalism. Wright made it clear that the objections raised by Du Bois, Padmore, James,
A N ENDING

315

Williams, Cox, and other Black radicals were grounded from below in the historical
consciousness of the Black masses. In Wright's time, in part because of the various
native and immigrant national and ethnic constituents making it up, the "white"
working class had not yet obtained a collective historical and cultural integration of
its own. As a class brought into being at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning
of the twentieth century by racial capitalism, to the extent that it existed, the workers'
collective consciousness remained a racial one subject to the disciplining ideologies of
the bourgeois class and responsive to what they had been led to believe was "American
culture." While that was true, only a small fraction of the class was capable of an
alliance with the Black liberation struggle. In the meanwhile, it became increasingly
clear to Wright and his colleagues that the project of revolutionary change required
reassessment and reconceptualization.
It is now a generation later. In the intervening years the Black radical tradition has
matured, assuming new forms in revolutionary movements in Africa, the Caribbean,
and North America. In the ideas of revolutionaries, among them Patrice Lumumba,
Kwame Nkrumah, Amilcar Cabral, Julius Nyerere, Robert Mugabe, Augustinho Neto,
Eduardo Mondlane, Marcelino dos Santos, Frantz Fanon, Aime Cesaire, Walter Rodney, and Angela Davis, Black radicalism has remained a currency of resistance and
revolt. However, the evolution of Black radicalism has occurred while it has not been
conscious of itself as a tradition. Doubtlessly there have been advantages to this. There
have been no sacred texts to be preserved from the ravages of history. There have been
no intellects or leaders whose authority secured ideological and theoretical conformity and protected their ideas from criticism. There has been no theory to inoculate
the movements of resistance from change. But it, too, is certain that there have been
disadvantages; partial comprehensions that it has now become imperative to transcend. The fractioning of African peoples is dysfunctional.
Meanwhile the clock of "modern times" is running down. Within Western culture,
that is the very civilization that in recent centuries has dominated a quarter of the
world and acquired so little consciousness in its experience with the rest, what once
were but faint signs of breakdown are now in bold evidence. Not even the brilliant
wizardry of high technological achievement can mute the rumblings from the degenerating mechanism. It is the occasion of opposition and contradiction and the moment of opportunity. That is because the times that mark the dissolutions of civilizations compound the maturations of both internal and external processes.
Physically and ideologically, and for rather unique historical reasons, African peoples bridge the decline of one world order and the eruption (we may surmise) of
another. It is a frightful and uncertain space of being. If we are to survive, we must
take nothing that is dead and choose wisely from among the dying.
The industrial nations are self-destructing. Others, too, of course, will be affected.
But the racial mythology that accompanied capitalist industrial formation and provided its social structures engendered no truly profound alternatives. The social,
ideological, and political oppositions generated within Western societies have proven
unequal to the task. They have acquired historical significance only when they re316

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

ceived comfort in the consciousness ofThird World peoples. There they mingled with
other cultures, taking their place among social priorities and historical visions largely
alien from their sites of origin. Such instances were the agrarian socialist revolutions
among the Indian peasants of Mexico early in this century; the coterminous social
revolutions and nationalist upheavals within the Russian Empire; the revolutionary
peasant movements of China and India; and in the period following the Second
World War, the national liberation movements of Madagascar and Cuba and on the
continents of Africa and Central and South America. The critique of the capitalist
world system acquired determinant force not from movements of industrial workers
in the metropoles but from those of the "backward" peoples of the world. Only an
inherited but rationalized racial arrogance and a romanticism stiffened by pseudoscience could manage to legitimate a denial of these occurrences. Western Marxism,
in either of its two variants-critical-humanist or scientific-has proven insufficiently
radical to expose and root out the racialist order that contaminates its analytic and
philosophic applications or to come to effective terms with the implications of its
own class origins. As a result, it has been mistaken for something it is not: a total
theory of liberation. The ensuing errors have sometimes been horrendous, inducing
in their wake dogmas of certainty characterized by desperation.
The Black radical tradition suggests a more complete contradiction. In social and
political practice, it has acquired its immediate momentum from the necessity to
respond to the persisting threats to African peoples characteristic of the modern
world system. Over the many generations, the specificity of resistance-at best securing only a momentary respite-has given way to the imperatives of broader collectivities. Particular languages, cultures, and social sensibilitieshave evolved into worldhistorical consciousness. The distinctions of political space and historical time have
fallen away so that the making of one Black collective identity suffuses nationalisms.
Harbored in the African diaspora there is a single historical identity that is in opposition to the systemic privations of racial capitalism. Ideologically, it cements pain to
purpose, experience to expectation, consciousness to collective action. It deepens
with each disappointment at false mediation and reconciliation, and is crystallized
into ever-increasing cores by betrayal and repression. The resoluteness of the Black
radical tradition advances as each generation assembles the data of its experience to
an ideology of liberation. The experimentation with Western political inventories of
change, specifically nationalism and class struggle, is coming to a close. Black radicalism is transcending those traditions in order to adhere to its own authority. It will
arrive as points of resistance here, rebellion there, and mass revolutionary movements
still elsewhere. But each instance will be formed by the Black radical tradition in an
awareness of the others and the consciousness that there remains nothing to which it
may return. Molded by a long and brutal experience and rooted in a specifically
African development, the tradition will provide for no compromise between liberation and annihilation.
The radical nationalist movements of our time in Africa and the African diaspora
have come at a historical moment when substantial numbers of the world's Black
A N ENDING

317

peoples are under the threat of physical annihilation or the promise of prolonged and
frightening debilitation. The famines that have always accompanied the capitalist
world system's penetration of societies have increased in intensity and frequency.
The appearance of literally millions of Black refugees, drifting helplessly beyond the
threshold of human sensibility, their emaciated bodies feeding on their own tissues,
have become commonplace. The systematic attack on radical Black polities, and the
manipulation of venal political puppets are now routine occurrences. Where Blacks
were once assured of some sort of minimal existence as a source of cheap labor, mass
unemployment and conditions of housing and health that are of near-genocidal
proportions obtain. The charades of neocolonialism and race relations have worn
thin. In the metropoles, imprisonment, the stupor of drugs, the use of lethal force by
public authorities and private citizens, and the more petty humiliations of racial
discrimination have become epidemic. And over the heads of all, but most particularly those of the Third World, hangs the discipline of massive nuclear force. Not
one day passes without confirmation of the availability and the willingness to use
force in the Third World. It is not the province of one people to be the solution or the
problem. But a civilization maddened by its own perverse assumptions and contradictions is loose in the world. A Black radical tradition formed in opposition to that
civilization and conscious of itself is one part of the solution. Whether the other
oppositions generated from within Western society and without will mature remains
problematical. But for now we must be as one.

318

BLACK R A D I C A L I S M A N D M A R X I S T THEORY

NOTES

Chapter One
1. One of the most extraordinary expressions of the expectations associated with the appearance of
capitalism was Marx's caustic appraisal of the bourgeoisie's world-historical significance:

The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand, has put an end to all feudal, patriarchal, idyllic
relations. It has pitilessly torn asunder the motley feudal ties that bound man to his "natural superiors:'
and has left remaining no other nexus between man and man than naked self-interest, than callous "cash
payment.". . .
The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every occupation hitherto honoured.
The hourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental veil. . . .
The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionizing the instruments of production, and
thereby the relations of production, and with them the whole relations of society. . . .
The bourgeoisie has, through its exploitation of the world-market, given cosmopolitan character to
production and consumption in every country. (Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist
Manifesto, in Robert Tucker [ed.], The Marx-Engels Reader, W. W. Norton, New York, 1972, pp. 337-38)
A more recent version of this vision of capitalism-reflecting both its authors' views and those of directors
of multinational (or global) corporations-is much less poetic but still as certain. "The power of the global
corporation derives from its unique capacity to use finance, technology, and advanced marketing skills to
integrate production on a worldwide scale and thus to realize the ancient capitalist dream of One Great
Market." Richard Barnet and Ronald Muller, Global Reach, Simon and Schuster, New York, 1974, p. 18.
2. Paul Sweezy et al., The Transition from Feudalism to Capitalism, New Left Books, London, 1976; and
Karl Marx, Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations, International Publishers, New York, 1965.
3. Fernand Braudel, Capitalism and Material Life, 1400-1800, Harper and Row, New York, 1973, pp. xiiiXV.

4. Karl Marx, The German Ideology, in Robert Tucker, op. cit., pp. 158-61.
5. Robert Latouche, The Birth of Western Economy, Barnes and Noble Inc., New York, 1961, p. 309.
6. Petr Kropotkin, Mutual Aid, Extending Horizon Books, Boston, n.d., pp. 117-18; Henri Pirenne,
Mohammed and Charlemagne, Unwin University Books, London, 1968, pp. 17-19, pp. 184-85; and William
C. Bark, Origins of the Medieval World, Stanford University Press, Stanford, 1958, pp. 26-27. Denys Hay
reminds us: "for neither Greeks nor Romans did Europe mean much. Fear of Persia lent colour to the
Greek attitude to the continents, but the empire of Alexander the Great was in Asia, not Europe, while the
remnants of this were conquered by a Rome which made its greatest advances in the north and west of
Europe. What cemented together the Greek world, and after it the world of Rome, was the inland sea,
which linked all but the most remote provinces, which was literally the cradle of Greek civilization and
which even the Romans, averse as they were to maritime adventure, annexed as 'Mare nostrum. 'Beyond the
serenity of the Mediterranean (as later ages were to call it) and the outposts of order carried outwards by
the Mediterranean conquerors, Greek or Roman, lay barbarism. Barbarians, as the Romans knew well
enough, were confined to no particular continent, and were particularly troublesome in Europe itself."
Hay, Europe: The Emergence of an Idea, Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, 1968, p. 4.
7. Oscar Halecki, The Millennium of Europe, Notre Dame University Press, South Bend, Indiana, 1963, p.
50.
8. Denis de Rougemont, The Idea of Europe, Macmillan Co., New York, 1966, pp. 47-49,53; and Duncan
McMillan, "Charlemagne Legends," Encyclopaedia Britannica, William Benton, Chicago, 1965,5:291-92.
9. H. Munro Chadwick, The Nationalities of Europe and the Growth of National Ideologies, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1945, pp. 50-75.

lo. Along with the Italic, the Hellenic, the Indian, the Iranian and Armenian, these are said sometimes to
constitute the Indo-European languages; see G. L. Brook, A History of the English Language, W. W. Norton
and Co. Inc., New York, 1958, pp. 30-60.
11. Chadwick, op. cit., pp. 14-49.
12. According to Chadwick, Basque presumably "represents the language, or one of the languages, of the
ancient Iberians," ibid., p. 49. Brook argues that there is evidence going back to the sixth century, B.C. of
Etruscan, Oscan, and Umbrian being spoken in Italy; Brook, op. cit., pp. 36-37.
13. Henri Pirenne, op. cit., pp. 17-71.
14. Ibid., pp. 36-37.
15. Ibid., pp. 28,32.
16. Ibid., p. 37. Pirenne reports that Gautier put the number of Roman Africans at seven to eight million
in the fifth century, and that Doren, for the same century, estimates that Italy's population ranged between
five and six million.
17. Latouche, op. cit., p. 70.
18. Ibid., pp. 59-60,71; Pirenne, op. cit., pp. 75-79.
19. Frank Snowden, Blacks in Antiquity, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1970, pp. 170-71.
20. Both Pirenne and Latouche argue that long before the mounting of political pressures on the
Germanic tribes by subsequent "barbarian" peoples-the Iranians, Mongols, Slavs, and Hungarians-the
Goths were motivated by essentially economic reasons to integrate with the more productive peoples of the
Empire. Pirenne, op. cit., pp. 37-39; Latouche, op. cit., pp. 42-45,
21. David Brion Davis, The Problems of Slavery in Western Civilization, Cornell University Press, Ithaca,
1966, pp. 29-61. The break in historical and cultural continuity that took place between the disintegration
of Greco-Roman civilization and the rise of Germanic civilization had at one time immense significance to
western European intelligentsias. Following Germania, written by the first-century Roman historian Tacitus, which contrasted the decadence of Rome to the martial virility of the Germanic tribes, they constructed myths of origin that distinguished superior cultures and races from inferior ones. At the latest,
from the sixteenth century and well into the twentieth century, English, German, and French scholars
generally distinguished "their" own Germanic cultural, racial, and philological roots from earlier (e.g.,
Celtic, Greco-Roman) and putatively later (the Normans) peoples. See Reginald Horsman, Race and
Manifest Destiny, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1981, pp. 9-42. George Mosse reminds us that
excerpts from Germania were a part of the standard curriculum "for the teaching of English constitutional
history until well after the Second World War." Mosse, Toward the Final Solution, J.M. Dent and Sons,
London, 1978, p. 48.
22. For Greek and Roman slavery, see William L. Westermann, The Slave Systems of Greek and Roman
Antiquity, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, 1955, and Snowden, op. cit.; for the feudal period,
see R. Welldon Finn, An Introduction to Domesday Book, Longmans, London, 1963, pp. 118-21, as cited by
Davis, op. cit., pp. 38-39, and Iris Origo, "The Domestic Enemy: The Eastern Slaves in Tuscany in the
Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries," Speculum 30, no. 3 (July 1955): 321-66, and Latouche, op. cit., pp. 12325; for Genoese and Venetian trades, see Henri Pirenne, Economic and Social History of Medieval Europe,
Harcourt, Brace and World, New York, 1937,pp. 16-20; Davis, op. cit., pp. 43,52; and Fernand Braudel, The
Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age ofPhilip II, Harper and Row, New York, 1976,1:29093 and z:754-y-both Davis and Braudel are largely based upon the work of Charles Verlinden, L'esclavage
dans I'Europe medievale, vol. 1, Peninsule Iberique, Brugge, France, 1955; and for the modern era see Eric
Williams, Capitalism and Slavery, Capricorn Books, New York, 1966.
23. Davis, op. cit., pp. 33,37.
24. Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World System, Academic Press, New York, 1974, p p 86-90.
Wallerstein wishes to distinguish between the economic and legal-political conditions of New World
slavery and a capitalist "serfdom" ("coerced cash crop labour") in eastern Europe and among "natives" of
the New World (the encomienda) of the sixteenth century. His definition of "coerced cash-crop labour" ("a
system of agricultural labour control wherein peasants are required by some legal process enforced by the
state to labour at least part of the time on a large domain producing some product for sale on the world
market" p. 91) would appear to serve as well as a description of slavery. The point is that alone it does not
distinguish the presumably distinct forms of forced labor. David Brion Davis observes that for at least the
medieval era, the distinctions were not as clear-cut in daily life as modern scholars would suggest. Davis,
op. cit., p. 33.
25. Pirenne, Mohammed and Charlemagne, op. cit., p. 140. In a note to the text, Pirenne observes: "These
things were retained: the language, the currency, writing (papyrus) weights and measures, the kinds of
foodstuffs in common use, the social classes, the religion-the role of Arianism has been exaggerated-art,
the law, the administration, the taxes, the economic organization." Ibid.
26. Latouche, op. cit., pp. 97-116; Pirenne, Economic and Social History of Medieval Europe, op. cit., pp.
39-40.
27. Dirk Jellema, "Frisian Trade in the Dark Ages," Speculum 30, no. 1 (January 1955): 15-36; and
320

N O T E S T O PAGES 1 1 - 1 2

Latouche, op. cit., pp. 120-23. The decline of trade in Merovingian Europe is an important aspect of the
attempt to challenge Henri Pirenne's "thesis" that the Muslim invasion of Europe by ending the European
Mediterranean trade with its social and cultural concomitants precipitated the beginnings of a "new"
European civilization inaugurated by Charlemagne's empire. See Pirenne, Mohammed and Charlemagne,
op. cit., pp. 162-85, Latouche, op. cit., pp. 117-88; Bark, op. cit., pp. 6-28; and Alfred Havighurst (ed.), The
Pirenne Thesis, D. C. Heath and Co., Boston, 1958.
28. Latouche, op. cit., p. 139.
29. Pirenne, Mohammed and Charlemagne, op. cit., pp. 184-85; Braudel, op. cit., p. 222.
30. Latouche, op. cit., pp. 173-74.
31. Ibid., pp. 297-98. Even by the late sixteenth century, the contrast in urban life was still great between
the European hinterland and the Mediterranean, Braudel writes: "[Tlhe Mediterranean region in the
sixteenth century (and it must be extended to its maximum when we are talking of towns) was unique in its
immensity. In the sixteenth century no other region in the world had such a developed urban network.
Paris and London were just on the threshold of their modern careers. The towns of the Low Countries and
southern Germany (the latter bathing in the reflected glory of the Mediterranean, the former stimulated
economically by merchants and sailors from the South), further north the industrious but small towns of
the Hanseatic League, all of these towns, thriving and beautiful though they might be, did not make up a
network as closely knit and complex as that of the Mediterranean, where town followed town in endless
strings, punctuated by great cities: Venice, Genoa, Florence, Milan, Barcelona, Seville, Algiers, Naples,
Constantinople, Cairo." Braudel, The Mediterranean, op. cit., pp. 277-78.
32. "Raoul Glaber has described with an insistence verging on sadism the appalling famine which
preceded the year 1033. He notes for instance that at the fair at Tournus in Burgundy, a man was offering
human flesh for sale, ready cooked on a butcher's stall." Latouche, op. cit., p. 298.
33. Bark, op. cit., pp. 70-82.
34. Pirenne, The Economic and Social History of Medieval Europe, op. cit., pp. 44-49; and Lopez and
Raymond, Medieval Trade in the Mediterranean World, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1955, pp. 87-104.
35. Pirenne, Medieval Cities, Their Origins and the Revival of Trade, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1948, p. 140.
36. Pirenne, Economic and Social History ofMedieva1 Europe, op. cit., p. 44.
37. Pirenne, Medieval Cities, op. cit., p. 6.
38. Pirenne, Economic and Social History ofMedieval Europe, op. cit., p. 40.
39. Pirenne, Medieval Cities, op. cit., pp. 114-15. Denys Hay, though in disagreement with Pirenne's
interpretation of the origins of these merchants, does not specifically cite the evidentiary basis of his view.
Europe in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries, Longman, London, 1966, p. 71.
40. Ihid., p. 126. Elsewhere Pirenne has explained: "[Ilt is incontestable that commerce and industry
were originally recruited from among landless men, who lived, so to speak, on the margin of a society
where land alone was the basis of existence." Economic and Social History ofMedieva1 Europe, op. cit., p. 45.
41. Pirenne, Medieval Cities, op. cit., pp. 143-44. In eastern Europe, it was a quite different story since the
political and economic powers of the towns were quixotic and short lived: "[Tlhe towns were compelled to
surrender their ancient rights of harbouring serfs; they were compelled to abandon leagues with other
towns; and the lords were even able to avoid using the towns as markets for their grain by selling it direct to
exporters."; Hay, op. cit., p. 41.
42. Pirenne, op. cit., p. 81.
43. Ibid., pp. loo-101.
44. Ibid., p. 155, and Pirenne, Economic and Social History ofMedieval Europe, op. cit., pp. 35-36.
45. Karl Polanyi, The Great Transformation, Beacon Press, Boston, 1957, p. 64.
46. Ibid.; and Pirenne, The Economic and Social History ofMedieva1 Europe, op. cit., pp. 160-66.
47. Pirenne, Medieval Cities, op. cit., pp. 154-56.
48. Pirenne, The Economic and Social History ofMedieva1 Europe, op. cit., pp. 57-58 ; and Hay, op. cit.,
P. 77.
49. Pirenne, Medieval Cities, op. cit., p. 193. See also Michael Tigar and Madeleine Levy, Law and the Rise
of Capitalism, Monthly Review Press, 1977, pp. 80-96; elsewhere, Tigar and Levy summarize their review of
the earliest thrusts of the bourgeoisie against the feudal order: "The great achievement of the bourgeoisie
in this period [iooo to izoo] was to wrest from seigneurs in hundreds of separate localities the recognition
of an independent status within the feudal hierarchy. The urban movement . . . demanded one major
concession from the seigneur: a charter . . . the status of bourgeois, burgher, or burgess" (p. 111).
50. Hay, op. cit., pp. 39,370.
51. Ibid., pp. 373-74.
52. Origo, op. cit., p. 326.
53. Origo, op. cit., pp. 328, 336; Davis, op. cit., p. 43; and Hay, op. cit., pp. 75-76.
54. Origo, op. cit., p. 336.
55. Hay, op. cit., p. 76. Hay observes that: "In these slave-owning communities of the Christian MediterN O T E S TO PAGES 12-16

321

ranean there is not much evidence that slaves were used in agriculture" (ibid.). Charles Verlinden does not
agree: "In Spain female slaves were generally cheaper than males, although the opposite was true in most of
Italy. This was because much of the slave manpower in Spain was used in agriculture and in industry,
whereas in Italy the domestic slave predominated in the cities and therefore more female workers were
required." Charles Verlinden, "The Transfer of Colonial Techniques from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic:' in The Beginnings ofModern Colonization, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1970, p. 29.
56. Charles Verlinden notes: "The Latin word sclavus, the common source of the words esclave, esclavo,
escravo, schiavo, Sklave, and slave, did not take root during that initial period [pre-Middle Ages] when
slavery was common to the whole of Europe. . . . It was only when slaves were recruited from entirely new
sources that other terms appeared to indicate the nonfree, and among these were sclavus, derived from the
ethnic name of the Slav people and popularized. It appeared first in its Latin form in tenth century
Germany." "Medieval Slavery in Europe and Colonial Slavery in America," Verlinden, op. cit., pp. 35-36.
57. Charles Verlinden, "The Transfer of Colonial Techniques," op. cit., pp. 31-32.
58. Giuliano Procacci, The History of the Italian People, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1970,p p 4445.
59. R. H. Tawney has commented on the several forms of capitalism in European history. The occasion
for his remarks was the review of Maurice DobbS Studies rn the Development of Capitalism (Routledge,
London, 1946): "Mr. Dobb's limitation of the term 'capitalism' to a particular system of production, under
which labour is employed on the basis of a wage contract to produce surplus value for the owner of capital,
might seem, at first sight, to escape some of the ambiguities inherent in less restricted interpretations; but it
raises problems of its own. It is not merely that, as he would agree, financial and commercial capitalism
have been highly developed in circumstances when the institution, as interpreted by him, has been a feeble
plant, and that to exclude these varieties on the ground that they do not fall within the four corners of the
nineteenth-century definition is to beg the question. It is that, as his work shows, the origins and growth of
the industrial species require for their elucidation to be considered in relation to the history of other
members of the family, some of which have been among its progenitors. Obviously the capitalism of our
day rests predominantly on a wage-system, and the latter is so familiar that it is tempting to treat it as
historically a constant." Tawney, "A History of Capitalism:' Economic History Review, 2d ser., vol. 2, no.3
(1950): 310-11.
60. Marian Malowist, "The Economic and Social Development of the Baltic Countries from the Fifteenth to the Seventeenth Centuries," Economic History Review, 2d ser., vol. 12, no. 2 (1959): 177-78, and
Wallerstein, op. cit., pp. 21-26.
61. Hay, op. cit., p. 34.
62. Ibid., pp. 34-35.
63. Norman Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millennium, Oxford University Press, New York, 1970, pp. 198-99;
and Hay, op. cit., pp. 35-37; and Procacci, op. cit., p. 46.
64. E. M. Carus-Wilson and Olive Coleman, England's Export Trade, 1275-1547, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1963, pp. 201-7.
65. Hay, op. cit., p. 387.
66. Ibid., p. 389.
67. P. Ramsey, "The European Economy in the Sixteenth Century," Economic History Review, 2d ser., vol.
12, no. 3 (April 1960): 458.
68. Hay, op. cit., p. 389.
69. Ibid.; and Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 148.
70. Halil Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1966, pp. 133-39.
71. K. G. Davies, "The Mess of the Middle Class," Past and Present, no. 22 (July 1962):82.
72. As quoted by Immanuel Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 124 note.
73. Davies, op. cit., p. 79.
74. In his important but flawed study of mercantilism, Eli Heckscher made a point on the conceptualization of capitalism related to that of Davies quoted above in the text. Heckscher commented "that the
method of treating all sorts of disconnected tendencies, paving the way to modern economic conditions,
under the common name of 'modern capitalism' appears to me confusing and a thing to be shunned."
Mercantilism, George Allen and Unwin, London, 1955,i:q.
75. The phrase is Immanuel Wallerstein's, op. cit., p. 133; see also Perry Anderson, Lineages of the Absolute
State, New Left Books, London, 1974, p p 40-41.
76. V. G. Kiernan, "State and Nation in Western Europe," Past and Present, no. 31 (July 1965):34.
77. Ibid., pp. 25-26.
78. "War for [the monarchy] was not an optional policy, but an organic need. . . . The whole State
apparatus that rulers were putting together piecemeal was largely a by-product of war. During its adolescence, the sixteenth and seventeenth Centuries, fighting was almost continuous; later on it grew rather
more intermittent." Ibid., p. 31.

322 NOTES TO PAGES 16-20

79. Wallerstein, op. cit., pp. 136-39. For an extensive discussion of the state-merchant associations see
Heckscher, op. cit., vol. 1, pp. 340-455.
80. Braudel, The Mediterranean, op. cit., vol. 1, p. 344, and vol. 2, p. 695.
81. See D. C. Coleman, "Eli Heckscher and the Idea of Mercantilism," Scandinavian Economic History
Review 5, no. 1 (1957): 3-4.
82. Wallerstein, op. cit., pp. 146-47.
83. Coleman, op. cit., pp. 18-19; see also Carl Bucher, Industrial Evolution, August Kelley, New York, 1968
(Orio igoi), pp. 136-39.
84. Heckscher, op. cit., vol. 2, pp. 14-15 Wallerstein apparently has some problems with this particular
attribution to sixteenth-century bourgeoisie. While relying on Kiernan for his own characterizationrather loosely-Wallerstein presents an interpretation that is inconsistent with respect to the distinctions
to be made between statism and nationalism: "It was only in the late seventeenth and eighteenth Centuries
within the framework of mercantilism that nationalism would find its first real advocates amongst the
bourgeoisie. But in the sixteenth century, the interests of the bourgeoisie were not yet surely fixed on the
state. Too large a number were more interested in open than in closed economies. And for state builders,
premature nationalism risked its crystallization around too small an ethno-territorial entity. At an early
point, statism could almost be said to be anti-nationalist, since the boundaries of 'nationalist' sentiment
were often narrower than the bounds of the m o n a r c h state." Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 146; see also Kiernan,
op. cit., pp. 29-30.
85. See Coleman, op. cit., p. 21.
86. Heckscher, op. cit., vol. 2, p. 18.
87. Ibid., pp. 18-23; see also Wallerstein, op. cit., pp. 196-97.
88. Fernand Braudel: "Beginning in the sixteenth century and with more eclat in this century of renewal,
the States-at least those who would live, prosper and especially resist the exhausting expenses of land and
sea warfare-the States dominate, deform economic life, subject it to a network of constraints; they capture
it in their net. . . the part of economic life that was at that point most modern, that which we would readily
designate as operating within the framework of largescale merchant capitalism was linked to these financial
ups and downs of the State." Quoted by Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 138 note.
89. Friedrich Hertz, Race and Civilization, KTAV (no place), 1970, p. 4; see also Hannah Arendt, The
Origins of Totalitarianism, Meridian Books, Cleveland, 1958, pp. 161-65, and Henri Peyre, Historical and
Political Essays, University of Nebraska, (no place), 1968, pp. 29-30. (Peyre acknowledges his debt to
Jacques Barzun, see The French Race, Kennirat, New York, 1966 Oris.1432, and Race, Harcourt Brace, New
York, 1932.) One should also mention that with respect to the Ham legend and its origins as a rationalization for African slavery in North America, Winthrop Jordan in his highly regarded study White Over Black
(University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 1968), in company with most American scholars, has
virtually ignored the phenomenon of racist attitudes among Europeans toward other Europeans-this
despite his claim to be familiar with the relevant literature (see his appendix, "Essay on Sources").
90. Hertz, op. cit., p. 6.
91. Heckscher, op. cit., vol. 2, p. 18.
92. V. B. Kiernan, "Foreign Mercenaries and Absolute Monarchy," Past and Present, no. 2 (April 1957):
76-77.
93. Ibid., p. 68; see also Braudel, The Mediterranean, op. cit., ~739-43.
94. Kiernan, op. cit., p. 74.
95. Ibid., p. 78.
96. Ibid., p. 69.
97. Ibid., p. 72.
98. That there were several other sides to the relation of the state to mercenaries is attested to by Braudel
(The Mediterranean, op. cit., vol. 2): "Sea-pirates were aided and abetted by powerful towns and cities.
Pirates on land, bandits, received regular backing from nobles. Robber bands were often led, or more or
less closely directed, by some genuine noblemen" (p. 749); "banditry had other origins besides the crisis in
noble fortunes: it issued from peasantry and populace alike. This was a groundswell-'a flood tide' as an
eighteenth-century historian called it, which stirred up a variety of waters. As a political and social (though
not religious) reaction, it had both aristocratic and popular components (the 'mountain lungs' in the
Roman Campagna and around Naples were more often than not peasants and humble folk)" (p. 751).
99. The nineteenth-century armies of imperialist Europe continued the tradition of relying on substantial recruitment among ethnic minorities, "riff-raff," outcasts, aliens and the peasantry: to the million serfs
of the Russian army were added the Asiatic Bashkirs and Kalmucks, Ingush and Ossietin; the Corsicans and
Bretons of the French army were augmented by the Legion founded o n Kabyle swordsmen, Swiss and other
European mercenaries, but by mid-century the army itself had come to be dominated by West Africans; in
the Philippines, the Spanish army was native, as was the Dutch army of the East Indies. In India, the East
India Company and the Bengal army (1842) employed between them upward of 70,000 natives in their

NOTES TO PAGES 2 0 - 2 3

323

sepoy regiments. In Britain itself, in 1832, the Irish accounted for 42 percent of the army. See V. G. Kiernan,
European Empires from Conquest to Collapse, Leicester University Press, Leicester, 1982, pp. 17-32.
loo. Bucher, op. cit., p. 346; Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 117; see also Stephen Castles and Godula Kosack,
Immigrant Workers and Class Structure in Western Europe, Oxford University Press, London, 1973, p p 1525; Braudel says it best: "These indispensable immigrants were not always unskilled labourers or men of
little aptitude. They often brought with them new techniques that were as indispensable as their persons to
urban life. The Jews, driven out by their religious beliefs not their poverty, played an exceptional role in
these transfers of technology. . . . There were other valuable immigrants, itinerant artists for instance
attracted by expanding towns which were extending their public buildings; or merchants, particularly the
Italian merchants and bankers, who activated and indeed created such cities as Lisbon, Seville, Medina del
Campo, Lyons and Antwerp. An urban community needs all sorts and conditions of men, not least rich
men. Towns attracted the wealthy just as they attracted the proletariat, though for very different reasons."
The Mediterranean, op. cit., 1:336-37.
101. Wallerstein, op. cit., pp. 118-19; Bucher makes a similar comment, op. cit., p. 353.
102. Chaim Bermant, London's East End, Macmillan Publishing, New York, 1975, pp. 30-31.
103. Ibid., p. 43; see also E. P. Thompson, op. cit., pp. 469-85; and Stephen Castles and Godula Kosack,
op. cit., pp. 16-17.
104. See Paul Lazarsfeld and Anthony Oberschall, "Max Weber and Empirical Social Research," American Sociological Review 30, no. 2 (April 1965):185-88.
105. See Stephen Castles and Godula Kosack, "The Function of Labour Immigration in Western European Capitalism," New Left Review, no. 73 (May-June 1972):6; and Bucher, op. l-it., pp. 367-68.
106. See David Brody, Steelworkers in America, Harper Torchbooks, New York, 1969, p p 96-99.
107. See Howard Brett Melendy, The Oriental Americans, Twayne Publishers, New York, 1972; Mary R.
Coolidge, Chinese Immigration, Arno Press, New York, 1969 (orig. 1909); and Stuart Miller, The Unwelcome
Immigrant, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1969.
108. "A 'nation' is etymologically a 'birth,' or a 'being born,' and hence a race, a kin or kind having a
common origin or, more loosely, a common language and other institutions. . . . There is not only an
original and individual birth for each system but a continual birth of new institutions within it, a continual
transformation of old institutions, and even a rebirth of the nation after death." Max Fisch's introduction
to The New Science of Giambattista Vico, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1970, p. xxiii; see also Friedrich
Hertz for an example of the length to which the monarchy was willing to go to produce the appropriate
illusion: "The theory already put forward by Bodin that the Franks were a people of Gallic stock who had
wandered into Germany, and from there had returned later as deliverers of their brothers from the Roman
yoke, came into favour under Louis XIV. Within the French people there was, therefore, no racial difference, but national unity of the kind so much desired by the absolute monarchy. This theory very conveniently lent support to the desire for the annexation of the Rhine, the restoration of which, as old Frankish
territory, he affected to demand," op. cit., p. 5.
109. Kiernan, op. cit., Past and Present, no. 31, p. 27.
110. Robert S. Lopez, The Birth ofEurope, Phoenix House, London, 1966, pp. 103-4.
111. Robert S. Lopez and Irving Raymond (eds.), Medieval Trade in the Mediterranean World, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1955, pp. 79-80 and 87-107.
112. Braudel, The Mediterranean, op. cit., 1:3zi.
113. Ibid., 2:695.
114. Halil Inalcik, The Ottoman Empire, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1966, pp. 133-39.
115. Braudel, The Mediterranean, op. cit., ~336-37.
116. Ibid., p. 322.
117. Ibid., p. 344.
118. Ibid., p. 334.
119. Ibid., pp. 334-36.
120. See Charles Verlinden, op. cit.; Eric Williams, op. cit.; and David Brian Davis, op. cit.
121. See Karl Mannhein, Ideology and Utopia, Harcourt, Brace and World, New York, 1936, pp. 121-24;
and Hertz, op. cit., pp. 6, lo.
122. T. K. Derry and M. G. Blakeway, The Making of Pre-Industrial Britain, John Murray, London, 1973,
passim.
123. See Arendt, op. cit., pp. 165-67; Hertz, op. cit., pp. 1-19.
124. Reginald Horsman, 1981, pp. 14-15.
125. Ibid., chap. 2.
126. Louis Snyder, The Idea ofRacialism, D. Van Nostrand, Princeton, 1962, pp. 39-40 (also see pp. 20-23
and 39-53); see also Snyder's Race, Longmans, Green and Co., New York, 1939, pp. 93-95; Magnus
Hirschfield, Racism, Victor Gollancz, London, 1938. (Hirschfield, interestingly, traces the usage of the term
"race" from its introduction in scientific literature by Comte de Buffon in 1749, to its appearance in the

324

NOTES TO PAGES 2 3 - 2 7

prolegomena of Immanuel Kant's summer course in 1775 at Konigsberg in the form of White Race, Negro
Race, Hunnish Race, Hindu Race, and mongrel races, pp. 51-54.)
127. See Eric Hobsbawm, "Some Reflections on Nationalism," in T. J. Nossiter, A. H. Hanson, and Stein
Rokkan (eds.), Imagination and Precision in the Social Sciences, Faber and Faber, London, 1972,pp. 385-406.
128. See Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto, in Robert Tucker (ed.), The MarxEngels Reader, op. cit., 1972, pp. 342-43.
129. See Louis Snyder, The Idea of Racialism, op. cit., pp. 155-65 for excerpts from various National
Socialist thinkers in Germany including Adolf Hitler, Alfred Rosenberg, Ernst Hauer, Felix FischerDodeleben, Wihelm Klesserow, Ernst Krieck, Walter Darre, Herman Gauch, and, as well, appropriate
selections from the Nuremberg Laws (1935); see also Mannheim, op. cit., pp. 134-46; M. N. Roy, Fascism,
Best Books, Jijnasa, 1976, pp. 33-43; and Renzo De Felice, Interpretations of Fascism, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, 1977, pp. 176-78.
130. See William Styron, "Hell Reconsidered:' New York Review of Books, 29 June 1978, pp. 10-12,14.

Chapter Two
1. E. P. Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class, p. 9.

2. Thompson himself, if I recall correctly, mentions Blacks in his study of late eighteenth and early
nineteenth century English working classes on only two occasions! One ofthese instances is his reference to
a Black artisan; the other is the appearance of a Black man as a representation of Satan in a nightmare
recalled by a dissident minister.
3. Excerpts from the introductions of two of the many studies of socialist history will suffice in demonstrating the persistence of the identification of socialism with the two "revolutions." George Lichtheim in
his Preface writes: "The purpose of the present work is . . . to clarify the origins of socialism, both as a
world-view and is the specific response of workers and intellectuals to the twofold upheaval of the French
Revolution and the Industrial Revolution," The Origins of Socialism, Praeger, New York, 1969, p. vii. G. D.
H. Cole, though somewhat uneasy about the periodization and definitiveness of the Industrial Revolution,
nevertheless succumbs to the convenience of the phrase and its popular significations. He observes: "It is
now commonplace to say that from 1789 onwards Europe was in the throes of three kinds of revolutionary
change-political and social, symbolized by the events in France and their repercussions in other countries,
industrial, marked by the advent of steam power and the extended application of scientific techniques in
manufacture and in civil and mechanical engineering, and agrarian, involving vast changes in methods of
land-cultivation and stock-breeding, and in the character of rural life." A History of Socialist Thought, vol. I ,
Socialist Thought, the Forerunners, 1789-1850, St. Martin's Press, New York, 1953, p. lo.
4. Asa Briggs, "The Language of 'Class' in Early Nineteenth-Century England:' in Asa Briggs and John
Saville (eds.), Essays in Labour History, Macmillan, London, 1960, p. 43; see also Melvin Kranzberg's
"Industrial Revolution," in Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1965,12:210-15.
5. A. E. Musson, "Continental Influences on the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain:' in Barrie
Ratcliffe (ed.), Great Britain and Her World, 1750-1914, Manchester University Press, Manchester, 1975, p.
73. For industrialization in France in the early nineteenth century, see W. 0 . Henderson, The Industrial
Revolution in Europe, Quadrangle, Chicago, 1961, pp. 86-88.
6. For example, Mnsson notes that: "In the smelting and refining of metallic ores . . . German skill and
capital . . . were extremely important. Water-powered technology and mining operations were further
developed . . . from Dutch and German experience. It was from the Continent, moreover, that the blast
furnace and iron casting were introduced into England in the sixteenth century, followed by rolling and
slitting mills for the products of the forge." Ibid.
7. E. J. Hobsbawm, "Economic Fluctuations and Some Social Movements Since 1800,'' in Economic
History Review, zd ser., vol. 5, no. 1 (1952): 17,19.
8. Hobsbawm cautions, "Our best indices are mortality rates (average expectation of life, infantile, TB
mortality, etc.), morbidity rates and anthropometric data. Unfortunately in Britain we lack any reliable
anthropometric data such as the French, and any index ofhealth such as the percentage of rejected recruits.
Nor have we any useful morbidity figures:' "The British Standard of Living 1790-1850:' in Hobsbawm's
Labouring Men, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1964, p. 71. Hobsbawm's comments take place in the
context of a debate with the "optimists" interpretation of the social consequences of the appearance of
industrial forms of production; Hobsbawm sides with the "pessimists." "It is today heterodox to believe
that early industrialization was a catastrophe for the labouring poor . . . let alone that their standard of
living declined. This article proposes to show that the currently accepted view is based on insufficient
evidence. . . . It is dangerous to reject the consensus of informed and intelligent contemporaries of
industrialization, a majority of whom, as even critics admit, took the dark view. . . . For the sake of
convenience the classical (Ricardo-Malthus-Mam-Toynbee-Hammond) view will be called the pessimistic,
the modern (Clapham-Ashton-Hayek) view the optimisticschool." Ibid., p. 64.

NOTES TO PAGES 2 7 - 3 1

325

9. Norman Longmate, The Workhouse, St. Martin's Press, New York, 1974, p p 45ff; for further evidence
of the hostility of the ruling classes toward the poor and the punitive use of workhouses, see E. P.
Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class, op. cit., pp. 266-68.
lo. Hobsbawm, "The British Standard," op. cit., p. 73.
11. See Longmate, op. cit., p. 44; and Thompson, op. cit., pp. 217-24.
12. See Hobsbawm's discussion of unemployment patterns and social eruptions and the manner in
which these were affected by the convergences in the nineteenth century of agrarian-based depressions
with the less seasonal patterns of industrial business cycles, "Economic Fluctuations," op. cit., pp. 4-9.
13. Ibid., pp. 10-11, and Thompson, op. cit., pp. 219-21.
14. Hobsbawm, "The British Standard:' op. cit., p. 74.
15. Thompson, op. cit., p. 250.
16. As quoted by Thompson, ibid.
17. Hobsbawm, "The British Standard," op. cit., p. 73.
18. See Thompson, op. cit., pp. 247-48. Thompson comments that "the rewards of the 'march of
progress' always seemed to be gathered by someone else . . . for these particular insecurities were only a
facet of the general insecurity of all skills during this period (p. 248).
19. See Brian Inglis, Poverty and the Industrial Revolution, Hodder and Stoughton, London, 1971,passim;
and A. J. Taylor, "Progress and Poverty in Britain," History 45 (Feb. 1960): 16-31.
20. E. P. Thompson, op. cit., pp. 320-21.
21. Hobsbawm suggests, "The habit of industrial solidarity must be learned, like that of working a
regular week; so must the common sense of demanding concessions when conditions are favourable, not
when hunger suggests. There is thus a natural time-lag, before new workers become an 'effective' labour
movement. . . . Various factors may precipitate such artificially retarded entrances of workers into organized labour activity. The news of labour unrest elsewhere, once it penetrates the new area, may set it off.
So may political events and stresses, e.g. the French general election of 1936 or the setting up of Congress
provincial governments in India in 1937." "Economic Fluctuations," op. cit., p. 21.
22. J. L. Hammond, "The Industrial Revolution and Discontent," Economic History Review 2, no. 2
(January 1930): 224-25.
23. Ibid., pp. 221,223.
24. Asa Briggs, op. cit., p. 64. It is interesting that Mill's eldest son, John Stuart Mill, displayed a family
resemblance in his own views toward the working classes. Nicholas Mansergh reports that "Having noted
in his Representative Government that the Conservative Party was by the law of its composition the
stupidest party, Mill observed in a pamphlet that the English working classes, though differing from those
of some other countries in being ashamed of it, were yet generally liars." The Irish Question, 1840-1921,
University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1965, p. 117.
25. See Hobsbawm's "The Machine Breakers," in Labouring Men, op. cit., pp. 5-22; and George Rude's
essay on "Luddism," in his The Crowd in History, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1964, pp. 79-92.
26. Hobsbawm, ibid., pp. 10-11.
27. Ibid.; and Hobsbawm's "Economic Fluctuations," op. cit., pp. 5-9; and E. P. Thompson, op. cit., pp.
225-28.
28. Ibid., p. 13.
29. See the curious transition that Marx makes in The Communist Manifesto (op. cit.) from his discussion of the bourgeoisie to his account of the appearance of the proletariat in history. The point that class as
determined by the history of bourgeoisies, and class with respect to the proletariat are concretely and
philosophically different is made by Cornelius Castoriadis: "The history of the workers' movement is the
history of the activity of human subjects belonging to a socioeconomic category created by capitalism.
Through their activity and that of others who fought at their side, this category has transformed itself into
a class of a type for which history offers no analogies." "On the History of the Workers' Movement," Telos,
no. 30 (Winter 1976-77): 38.
30. Rude, op. cit., p. 230; see also L. P. Curtis, Jr., Anglo-Saxons and Celts, University of Bridgeport,
Bridgeport, 1968, pp. 31-33.
31. See J. L. Hammond, op. cit., pp. 215-26; and Hobsbawm, "History and 'The Dark Satanic Mills' " and
"The Standard of Living Debate: A Postscript:' in Labouring Men, op. cit., for more on the vissicitudes of
English labor historiography.
32. At least one implication of recognizing that the industrial working class of the early nineteenth
century was a minority class is suggested in Hammond's concession to J. H. Clapham: "Dr. Clapham is. . .
entitled to point out that in 1831 the building trades employed more heads of families than the cotton
industry, and that the cotton workers were greatly outnumbered by the domestic servants. Certain of the
calamities or losses that accompanied the Industrial Revolution fell only on part of the working class
population, and that not the largest part." Hammond, op. cit., p. 216. As we have seen in the text,
Hammond does not agree with Clapham but does acknowledge a warrant for the latter's assertions; in like

326

NOTES TO PAGES 3 1 - 3 5

manner, one must note that Hobsbawm, Mayhew, and Thompson take on the optimists on the statistical
turf of reliability and validity of data.
33. Thompson, op. cit., pp. 828-29.
34. Ibid., p. 831; and R. A. Huttenback, Racism and Empire, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1976, pp. 1522.
35. See Royden Harrison, "The British Labour Movement and the International in 1864," in Ralph
Miliband and John Saville (eds.), The Socialist Register 1964, Merlin Press, London, 1964, pp. 293-308.
36. Ibid., p. 306; and W. H. Fraser, "Trade Unionism," in J. T. Ward (ed), PopularMovements c. 1830-1850,
Macmillan, London, 1970, p. 113. For the role of the Irish Question in the defection of English labor from
class praxis, see Mansergh, op. cit., pp. 113-21.
37. Thompson, op. cit., pp. 828-29.
38. Eric Williams, Capitalism and Slavery, op. cit., Maurice Dobb, op. cit.; and R. H. Tawney, op. cit.
39. See Edward Norman, A History of Modern Ireland, Allen Lane the Penguin Press, London, 1971, pp.
33-44.
40. Thomas W. Heyck, The Dimensions of British Radicalism: The Case of Ireland, University of Illinois
Press, Urbana, 1974, p. ix.
41. James A. Froude, The English in Ireland, Scribner, Armstrong, New York, 1874,3:11-17.
42. Michael Hechter, Internal Colonialism, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1975, pp. 72-73.
43. For a rather succinct treatment ofAnglo-Saxonism as an ideology, see L. P. Curtis, Jr., op. cit., pp. lo14. Briefly Curtis identifies the ideology with "I. an identifiable and historically authenticated race or
people known as the Anglo-Saxons who shared common ties of blood, language, geographical origin, and
culture. . . traced right back to the lutes, Angles, and Saxons. . . between the Baltic and the Black Forest. 2.
Civil and religious liberties enjoyed . . . in predominantly Anglo-Saxon societies . . . attributable to the
peculiar genius of the Anglo-Saxons in political affairs. 3. a combination of virtues and talents which made
them superior in all important respects to any other comparable racial or cultural group in the world. 4.
Such specifically Anglo-Saxon attributes as reason, restraint, self control, love of freedom and hatred of
anarchy, respect for law and distrust of enthusiasm were actually transmissible from one generation . . . to
the next in a kind of biologically determined entailed inheritance. 5. threats . . . of racial deterioration
through the strains and pressures of a highly urbanized and industrialized society, or of 'race suicide'
through a deliberate limitation of family size, or of the adulteration and contamination of Anglo-Saxon
blood by mixture with 'foreign' blood, whether that of the Irish, Jews, Italians, French, and so on" (pp. 1112).
44. lames A. Froude, The English in Ireland, op. cit., 1873,1:14.
45. Ibid. Froude's comments bear some resemblance to those of Karl Marx, see "Outline of a Report on
the Irish Question to the Communist Educational Association of German Workers in London," in the
Marx-Eugels collection entitled Ireland and the Irish Question, International Publishers, New York, 1972, p.
127.
46. Ibid., p. 16.
47. Ibid., pp. 24-25,
48. Ibid, p. 35, see also Hechter, op. cit., p. 72.
49. Hechter, op. cit., p. 72. Hechter plays a little loose with dates (he puts the Act of Irish Union in 1801
when its official date is I August 1800) and periodization. The policy of the plantation of Ireland begins
under Elizabeth I, not lames I. See Froude, op. cit., ~49-51;and Mansergh, op. cit., p. 40.
50. Froude, op. cit., ~52-65. O'Neill is an Irish title of pre-Conquest authority that was used "as the
symbol of the Irish independent sovereignty" (p. 59).
51. R. D. Edwards' contribution on "The Tudors," in the essay "Ireland," in Encyclopaedia Britannica,
1965,12:556-57.
52. Mansergh, op. cit., p. 40.
53. Froude cites Petty's figures from the latter's Political Arithmetick (1699); Froude, op. cit., 1x33. Marx,
somewhat earlier, identified Petty as "the father of English political economy" but characterized him as
".
just a frivolous, grasping, unprincipled adventurer"; see Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy, International Publishers, New York, 1970 (orig. 1859), pp. 53 and 55 respectively. For Petty's
interests in Ireland, see Eric Strauss, Irish Nationalism and British Democracy, Columbia University Press,
New York, 1951, pp. 13-16.
54. Froude, ibid., pp. 219-85.
55. Hechter asserts: "It was not until the Cromwellian Settlement that religious differences came to be the
dominant political cleavage in Irish society. Cromwell's policies toward the adherents of Catholicism were
harsh. For a time Catholic clergy were killed whenever they could be found. Of more lasting import,
Catholic landowners, of either Anglo-Norman or Irish descent, were very largely stripped oftheir land; this
expropriated land was then used as payment for Cromwell's military lieutenants in the Irish campaign. By
1688 nearly 80 per cent of Irish land was in the hands of Englishmen and Scottish Protestants." Hechter, op.

NOTES TO PAGES 3 5 - 3 8

327

cit., p. 103. Marx observes that another form of retribution during Cromwell's rule was "the sale of many
lrish into slavery in the West Indies"; Marx, "Outline of a Report," op. cit., p. 128.
56. Hechter, ibid., pp. 84,y3-94.
57. Ibid., p. 92. Engels had occasion to take on "the Irish landowners and the English bourgeois" who saw
the condition of Ireland in the nineteenth century as a natural phenomenon: "Compared with England,
Ireland is more suited to cattle-rearing on the whole; but if England is compared with France, she too is
more suited to cattle-rearing. Are we to conclude that the whole of England should be transformed into
cattle pastures, and the whole agricultural population be sent into the factory towns or to America?"
Engels, "History of Ireland," in Marx and Engels, Ireland and thelrish Question, op. cit., p. 190. For more on
the effects of free trade on Irish industry, see Strauss, op. cit., p. 120.
58. Thompson, op. cit., p. 429.
59 Ibid., p. 432.
60. Ibid., pp. 432-33. For more on "labour-rhythms" and a much more satisfying treatment of the
English workers" "Puritan temperament," see Thompson's essay, "Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial
Capitalism," in Past and Present, no. 38 (December 1967): 56-97.
61. Friedrich Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844, George Allen and Unwin,
London, 1950 (orig. 1845), p. 92. Strauss supports Thompson's views on "the crippling experience of work
in mills and mines" on English workers as the reason for the superior strength of Irish workers; see Strauss,
op. cit., p. 122. His final assessment, however, concurs with that of Engels (p. 124).
62. Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class, op. cit., pp. 424-25.
63. Eric Strauss, op. cit., pp. 126-27; and J. T. Ward, Chartism, Harper and Row, New York, 1974, pp. 6465>77.
64. Strauss, op. cit., pp. 72,127-31; and Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class, op. cit., p.
443.
65. Engels, Condition of the Working Class, op. cit., p. 124. Like many other European writers in the
nineteenth century, Engels tended to use the term "race" in both its biological sense, and in the sense of a
class. The confusions that ensued both for Engels and his reader are evident in the passages that follow that
quoted in the text: "The rough egotism of the English bourgeoisie would have kept its hold upon the
working-class much more firmly if the Irish nature, generous to a fault, and ruled primarily by sentiment,
had not intervened, and softened the cold, rational English character in part by a mixture of the races, and
in part by the ordinary contact of life. In view of all this, it is not surprising that the working-class has
gradually become a race wholly apart from the English bourgeoisie. . . . Thus they are two radically
dissimilar nations, as unlike as difference of race could make them, of whom we on the Continent have
known but one, the bourgeoisie" (ibid.).
66. Thompson, Making of the English Working Class, op. cit., p. 443.
67. Ward, Chartism, op. cit., pp. 239-43; Thompson, Making of the English Working Class, op. cit., p. 441;
and Strauss, op. cit., pp. 126-27.
68. Thompson, Making of the English Working Class, op. cit., p. 226; "transportation" was, of course, to
penal colonies such as New South Wales or Botany Bay in Australia, and necessarily entailed sentences of
several years. See also, Engels, Condition of the Working Class, op. cit., pp. 212-27.
69. W. E. B. Du Bois, "The African Roots of the War," Atlantic Monthly, May 1915, pp. 707-14 Du Rois
used the phrase "labor aristocracy" to refer to the material share of European industrial workers as
contrasted to the degrading conditions of peasants and agrarian laborers in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
His use of the term predates that of Lenin (Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, which Lenin
forwarded to his publisher in manuscript form in June 1916; see V. L. Lenin, Selected Works, International
Publishers, New York, 1967,1:859, n. 317) and is significantly different from Lenin's reference to the leaders
of trade unions by the term.
70. Marx's comments on this emigration from Ireland are interesting: "One country-Ireland-has
been
saved from revolting almost to her last man, by the emigration to this country [the U.S.]; emigration,
likewise, hither, says the London Times, 'has prevented cannon from being planted in the streets of
London'; but the Indian Empire is too far off for our succour." "Parliamentary Debate on India:' New York
Daily Tribune, 25 June 1853, as reprinted in Shlomo Avineri (ed.), Karl Marx on Colonialism and Modernization, Anchor Books, Garden City, 1969, p. 87.
71. Strauss, op. cit., pp. 158-69. Another force that might have been expected to have played a major part
in the "socialization" of the English working class, the mass schools, did not appear until almost midcentury. Indeed state support to schools did not begin until 1833 when matched grants were extended to the
two societies most significantly involved in the "moral" tutoring of working-class children, the British and
Foreign School Society, and the National Society. Still, it was not until the 1850s and 1860s that mass
schooling by the state was established. The textbooks of this period testify to the preoccupation with
Anglo-Saxonism in working-class education. See William Lazonick, "The Subjection of Labour to Capital:
The Rise of the Capitalist System," Review ofRadica1 Political Economics lo, no. 1 (Spring 1978): 10-14, and
R. Webb, The British Working Class Reader, Kelley, New York, 1971, chaps. 2 and 3.
328

NOTES T O PAGES 3 8 - 4 1

72. Letter from Marx to Engels, 10 December 1869, in Ireland and the Irish Question, op. cit., p. 284. The
depth of the feeling between Irish and English workers clearly disappointed Marx: "Every industrial and
commercial centre in England now possesses a working class divided into two hostile camps, English
proletarians and Irish proletarians. The ordinary English worker hates the Irish worker as a competitor
who lowers his standard of life. In relation to the Irish worker he feels himself a member of the ruling
nation and so turns himself into a tool of the aristocrats and capitalists of his country against Ireland thus
strengthening their domination over himself. He cherishes religious, social, and national prejudices against
the Irish worker. His attitude towards him is much the same as that of the 'poor whites' to the 'niggers' in
the former slave states of the U.S.A. The Irishman pays him back with interest in his own money. He sees in
the English worker at once the accomplice and the stupid tool of the English rule in Ireland." Marx to
Sigfrid Meyer and August Vogt, 9 April 1870, ibid., pp. 293-94.
73. See Strauss, op. cit., pp. 142-69.
74. Ibid., pp. 119-21.
75. See Castles and Kosack, "The Function of Labour Immigration in Western European Capitalism:' op.
cit., pp. 5-10. A thesis that is complementary to the present one that stresses the importance of ethnic and
national divisions in the English working class has been put forth by William Lazonick. Focusing on
divisions of labor based upon sex, Lazonick records how this other "precapitalist" tradition affected
working-class organization and consciousness: "The acceptance of the sex-based division of labour by the
male-dominated unions created the possibility, and perhaps even the necessity, of patriarchal workingclass polities" (p. 9). Further on he states, "[Tlhe integration of pre-capitalist patriarchal culture into the
realm of capitalist production and the realm of working-class politics served to perpetuate economic
inequality between the sexes, keeping the working-class woman materially dependent on the wage of the
working-class man" (p. lo). Lazonick, op. cit.
76. See Avineri's discussion of Marx on the proletariat, in Avineri, The Social and Political Thought of
Karl Marx, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1968, pp. 52-64.
77. See the excerpt from the "Confidential Communication:' which Marx sent to the Executive of the
German Social-Democratic Workers' Party, 28 March 1870, as a response to Bakunin's criticisms of the use
made of the Irish Question in factional fights in the I.W.M.A., in Ireland and the Irish Question, op. cit., pp.
160-63, and P. Berresford Ellis, A History of the Irish Working Class, George Braziller, New York, 1973, pp.
122-51.
78. Avineri, The Social and Political Thought ofKarl Marx, op. cit., p. 61; see also Isaiah Berlin, "Historical
Materialism," in Tom Bottomore (ed.), Karl Marx, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1973, p p 64-65.
79. Engels to Joseph Bloch, 21-22 September 1890, in Robert Tucker, op. cit., p. 642.
80. Engels once wrote that "history is . . . simply meant to comprise all the spheres-political, juridical,
philosophical, theological-belonging to society and not only to nature." Engels to Franz Mehring, 14 July
1893, ibid., p. 649.
81. In a letter to Conrad Schmidt, in October 1890, Engels wrote: "[TI he philosophy of every epoch, since
it is a definite sphere in the division of labour, has as its presupposition certain definite thought material
handed down to it by its predecessors, from which it takes its start." Ibid., pp. 646-47.
82. Engels to Joseph Bloch, op. cit., p. 641. Engels is paraphrasing Marx's opening statement in The
Eighteenth Brumaire ofLouis Bonaparte: "Men make their own history, hut they do not make it just as they
please; they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves, but under circumstances directly
found, given and transmitted from the past. The tradition of all the dead generations weighs like a
nightmare on the brain of the living." Tucker, op. cit., p. 437. Georg Lukacs, on the other hand, took a very
different view of the ~ossibilitiesof critical knowledge (a position identical with that of the two young men
who had collaborated on The Communist Manifesto): "To the degree to which capitalism carried out the
socialization of all relations it became possible to achieve self-knowledge, the true, concrete self-knowledge
of man as a social being." Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness,MIT Press, Cambridge, 1968, p. 237.
83. Berlin, op. cit., p. 67.

Chapter Three
1. Norman MacKenzie, Socialism: A Short History, Harper Colophon, New York, 1969, p. 20; and Cole, A
History of Socialist Thought, op. cit., 1:s-9. Lichtheim would have us begin (as he does) the history of
socialism with the appearance of the word "around 1830," for one, because "in dealing with a major
political and ideological current one cannot disregard the manner in which it has defined itself" (p. 3). But
one must remember that he is of that school of scholars that can write of socialist history that "it is in part
the story of a movement which had to emancipate itself from inherited illusions before it could attain a
consciousness of its true nature" (p. vii). Certain habits of mind-presumably from the Hegelian legacy
here-betray the best intentions. George Lichtheim, The Origins of Socialism, Praeger, New York, 1969.
2. Norman Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millennium, op. cit., p. 187.
3 Ibid., pp. 191-99.

NOTES TO P A G E S 4 1 - 4 6

329

4. Ibid., p. 195.
5. Ibid., pp. 198-280, and Friedrich Engels, The Peasant War in Germany, in Leonard Krieger (ed.), The
German Revolutions, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1967, pp. 35-52.
e
Ideology (op. cit.) by Marx
6. See Cole, op. cit., pp. 14-16 for ~ o u s i e a uas one instance, a n h ~ h German
and Engels as another, for the appearance of the historical category "primitive communism."
7. Engels, "Socialism: Utopian and Scientific," in Robert Tucker (ed.), The Marx-Engels Reader, op. cit.,
p. 607; see also Karl Marx, "On the Jewish Question," ibid., p. 49. Engels declared that: "The revolutionary
opposition to feudalism was alive throughout all the Middle Ages. According to conditions of the time, it
appeared either in the form of mysticism, as open heresy, or of armed insurrection. As mysticism, it is well
known how indispensable it was for the reformers of the Sixteenth Century. . . . In the other two forms of
medieval heresy, we find as early as the Twelfth Century the precursors of the great division between the
middle class and the peasant plebeian opposition which caused the collapse of the peasant war. This
division is manifest throughout the later Middle Ages." The Peasant War in Germany, op. cit., p. 35.
8. See, for example, E. J. Hobsbawm, "Trends in the British Labour Movement since 1850," in Labouring
Men, op. cit., esp. pp. 323-25; T. J. Nossiter, "Shopkeeper Radicalism in the 19th Century" in T. J. Nossiter,
A. H. Hanson, and Stein Rokkan (eds.), Imagination and Precision in the Social Sciences, Faber and Faber,
London, 1972, pp. 407-8; Albert Soboul, The French Revolution: 1787-1799, Random House, New York,
1974, pp. 3-31; and E. J. Hobsbawm, The Age ofRevolution: 1789-1848, Mentor, New York, 1962, pp. 285-90,
357-58.
9. Albert Fried and Ronald Sanders (eds.), Socialist Thought, Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh,
1964, pp. 15-16. Morelly, an eighteenth-century writer of obscure origins, greatly influenced Babeuf, the
French radical discussed in the text below.
lo. The last two phrases are those of G. D. H. Cole, op. cit., p. 14; see also Marx and Engels, The
Communist Manifesto, op. cit., p. 346.
11. See Herbert Marcuse, Reason and Revolution, Beacon Press, Boston, 1968, pp. 323-28.
12. Karl Marx, "Theses on Feuerbach," in Tucker (ed.), The Marx-Engels Reader, op. cit., p. 109, and also
John Passmore, The Perfectibility ofMan, Duckworth, London, 1970, pp. 212-38.
13. J. A. Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, Unwin, London, 1965, pp. 12-13.
14. Lichtheim, op. cit., pp. 3, 9.
15. David McLellan, for example, indicates that "in general the membership of the International tended
to be composed more of artisans than of the industrial proletariat." Karl Marx: His Life and Thought,
Harper Colophon, New York, 1973, p. 387.
16. David McLellan, Marx before Marxism, Macmillan, London, 1970, p. 13.
17. Karl Marx, The Holy Family, as quoted by Georg Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness,MIT Press,
Cambridge, 1968, p. 46.
18. Lenin wrote in 1901/2: "We have said that there could not have been Social-Democratic consciousness
among the workers. It would have to be brought to them from without. The history of all countries shows
that the working class, exclusively by its own effort, is able to develop only trade union consciousness, i.e.,
the conviction that it is necessary to combine in unions, fight the employers, and strive to compel the
government to pass necessary labour legislation, etc. The theory of socialism, however, grew out of the
philosophic, historical, and economic theories elaborated by educated representatives of the propertied
classes, by intellectuals. By their social status the founders of modern scientific socialism, Marx and Engels,
themselves belonged to the bourgeois intelligentsia." Lenin, What Is to Be Done? in Lenin, Selected Works,
International Publishers, New York, 1967,1:122. Marx acknowledged his class origins in The Communist
Manifesto: "Finally, in times when the class struggle nears the decisive hour. . .a portion of the bourgeoisie
goes over to the proletariat, and in particular, a portion of the bourgeois ideologists, who have raised
themselves to the level of comprehending theoretically the historical movement as a whole." Tucker (ed.),
The Marx-Engels Reader, op. cit., p. 343. Sometime later, in 1867, Marx made perfectly clear his perception
of his role in the workers' movement in a letter to Engels: "And in the next revolution, which is perhaps
nearer than it appears, we (i.e., you and I) will have this powerful engine [the International] in our hands"
(as opposed to being in the hands of "these fools of Proudhonists" or the "swine among the English Trade
unionists)." Quoted by William Lazonick, "The Subjection of Labour to Capital: The Rise of the Capitalist
System," Review ofRadica1 Political Economicsio, no. 1 (Spring 1978): 23 (for a more complete version of the
letter, see McLellan, Karl Marx, op. cit., p. 378).
19. Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire ofLouis Bonaparte, in Tucker (ed.), The Marx-Engel Reader, op.
cit., pp. 462, 464.
20. Karl Marx, The Communist Manifesto, ibid., p. 345.
21. For England, see Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class, op. cit., p. 213, and Rude, op.
cit., p. 84; for France, see Marx, The Eighteenth Brumatre of Louis Bonaparte, op. cit., p. 515; Rude, op. cit.,
pp. 164,176; and G. D. H. Cole, A History of Socialist Thought, op. cit., 1:18.
22. Albert Soboul, op. cit., pp. 46-47, 52.
23. Rude, op. cit., pp. 240-41.
330

NOTES TO PAGES 4 6 - 4 9

24. Soboul, op. cit., pp. 18,488-92.
25. G. D. H. Cole, op. cit., p. 20. Lichtheim states that "[tlhe extreme wing of the French Revolution may
thus be said to have given birth to a set of notions which, while never successfullypursued in France, were
destined to become politically effective in Russia. The crucial factor is the belief that the abolition of
poverty demands a temporary dictatorship which will dispossess the rich, who are also the effective holders
of power. The dictatorship will be exercised in the name of the people (or the proletariat), and it will come
to an end when its enemies have been forcibly removed or otherwise rendered harmless," op. cit., p. 22. See
also David Caute, Communism and the French Intellectuals, 1914-1960, Macmillan, New York, 1964, pp. 13,
286,290.
26. Lichtheim, op. cit., p. 21.
27. Soboul, op. cit., pp. 14-18.
28. See Caute, op. cit., p. 292; and Soboul, op. cit., pp. 410-38.
29. Soboul, op. cit., p. 438.
30. Ibid., p. 491.
31. Cole, A History ofSocialist Thought, op. cit., 1:zo-21.
32. Ibid., p. 18. Soboul comments: "The political organization of the Conspiracy marked a break with the
methods used till that time by the popular movement. At the centre of the organization stood the leading
group, backed by a small number of hardened militants; then there came the fringe of sympathizers,
comprising patriots and democrats (in the Year I1 sense of the word), who were not involved in the secrecy,
and who seem not to have shared the new revolutionary ideal; finally, there were the masses themselves,
who were to be coaxed into participation. In sum, Babeurs was an organizational conspiracy par excellence, but one in which the problem of the necessary links with the masses seems to have been largely
unresolved." Soboul, op. cit., pp. 490-91.
33. David Caute, op. cit., p. 290.
34. Robert Tucker, Philosophy and Myth in Karl Marx, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1971,pp.
73-105; Franz Mehring, Karl Marx The Story of His Life, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1969,
pp. 15-57; and David McLellan, Karl Marx, op. cit., pp. 16-77.
35. Karl Marx (Maurice Dobb, ed.), A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, International
Publishers, New York, 1970, p. 20.
36. See Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The German Ideology, in R. Tucker (ed.), The Marx-Engels
Reader, op. cit., pp. 113-57.
37. See Marx's letters to Kugelmann, 12 and 16 April 1871, in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected
Works, International Publishers, New York, 1972, i:679-81; and Engels's "Introduction to Karl Marx's Work
The Class Struggles in France 1848 to 1850," ibid., p. 651; and Mehring, op. cit., pp. 156-59,215,447-54.
38. McLellan Karl Marx, op. cit., pp. 290-359; and Mehring, op. cit., pp. 208-24.
39. For the quarrel with Vogt, see McLellan, ibid., pp. 310-15; and Mehring, op. cit. pp. 280-97; for
Lassalle, McLellan, ibid., pp. 315-25; and Mehring, ibid., pp. 265-78; for Mazzini, McLellan, ibid., pp. 25861; and Mehring, ibid., pp. 241-42; for Engels see McLellan, ibid., pp. 278-80,331-32; and Mehring, ibid.,
PP. 303-5.
40. In a letter to Ferdinand Freiligrath, Marx wrote: "After the 'League' was dissolved in November 1852
on my proposition, I no longer belonged to any Society whether secret or public, nor do I; thus the party in
this completely ephemeral sense ceased to exist for me eight years ago . . .thus I know nothing of the party,
in the sense of your letter, since 1852." Quoted by McLellan, ibid., pp. 313-14.
41. Mehring, op. cit., p. 276.
42. See G. 0.Griffith, Mazzini, Prophet ofModern Europe, Hodder and Stoughton, London, 1932, pp. 64,
235-36; and Stringfellow Barr, Mazzini, Portrait of an Exile, Holt, New York, 1935, pp. 238-40.
43. R. R. Palmer, with Joel Colton, A History of the Modern World, Knopf, New York, 1959, p. 514.
44. Lynn Case, Franco-Italian Relations, 1860-1865, AMS Press, New York, 1970 (orig. i932), pp. 3-31.
45. Franz Mehring, op. cit., pp. 268-69; see also Sir Adolphus W. Ward, Germany, 1815-1890, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1917, ~33-47, for the development of the Nationalverein movement and
German participation in the Italian war.
46. Geoffrey Barraclough, The Origins ofModern Germany, Capricorn, New York 1963, p. 414; and James
Joll, "The German Confederation, 1815-1866," Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1965,10:310-16.
47. Barraclough, op. cit., p. 412.
48. George Lichtheim, Marxism: An Historical and Critical Survey, Praeger, New York, 1973, pp. 69-70.
49. W. 0. Henderson, The Industrial Revolution in Europe, op. cit., pp. 21-22; and Friedrich Engels,
Germany: Revolution and Counter-Revolution, in Leonard Krieger (ed.), The German Revolutions, op. cit.,
pp. 126-29.
50. Barraclough, op. cit., p. 414. Though Barraclough finds some of Engels's remarks on the ultimate
failure of the middle classes to prosecute a democratic revolution a bit rash, he does endorse (apparently)
observations like the followingwritten by Engels: "[Ilt is quite as evident, and equally borne b i t by the
history of all modern countries, that the agricultural population, in consequences of its dispersion over a
NOTES TO PAGES 4 9 - 5 4

331

great space, and of the difficulty of bringing about an agreement among any considerable portion of it,
never can attempt a successful independent movement; they require the initiatory impulse of the more
concentrated, more enlightened, more easily moved people of the towns." Germany: Revolution and
Counter-Revolution, op. cit., p. 131.
51. Barraclough, op. cit., pp. 414-16.
52. Barraclough, ibid.; and Engels, Germany: Revolution and Counter-Revolution, op. cit., pp. 168-77.
53. Lichtheim, Marxism, op. cit., p. 78. Elsewhere Lichtheim asserts: "[llt is pertinent to recall that in
1848 both men could publicly and privately associate themselves with the cause of German national
unification, while remaining true to the principles laid down in the publications of the Communist
League. Under German conditions, nationalism was an integral part of the democratic programme, to
which the Communist group was committed since it represented the extreme left wing of the democratic
movement." Ibid., p. 72.
54.Barraclough, op. cit., pp. 4 - 1 8 ,
55. Ibid., p. 421.
56. McLellan, Karl Marx, op. cit., pp. 316-17; and Mehring, op. cit., pp. 270-71.
57. W. 0. Henderson notes that "In 1861, when Marx was visiting Lassalle in Berlin, he wrote to Engels
that it was believed in the most exalted military circles that Po und Rhein had been written by a Prussian
general." Henderson, The Life of Friedrich Engels, vol. I, Frank Cass, London, 1976, p. 209.
58. Mehring, op. cit., pp. 274-75.
59. As quoted by Anthony Smith, Theories of Nationalism, Harper and Row, New York, 1971, p. 73.
60. Mehring, op. cit., p. 272.
61. Arno Schirokauer, Lassalle, The Power of Illusion and the Illusion of Power, George Allen and Unwin,
London, 1931, pp. 202-3. It is ironic that Lassalle's sensitivity to the crowd mentality of nationalism brought
him close to demagoguery in the eyes of some of his contemporaries and colleagues. In this particular
instance his analytical instincts were correct, German nationalism was in opposition to revolutionary
consciousness. See George Brandes, Ferdinand Lassalle, Bergman, New York, 1968 (orig. 1874 and 1875),p.
190; and Mehring, op. cit., p. 276.
62. McLellan, Karl Marx, op. cit., p. 317.
63. Mehring, op. cit., p. 271.
64. McLellan, Karl Marx, op. cit., p. 317.
65. G. D. H. Cole partially accounts for the differences between MarxIEngels and Lassalle in programmatic terms: "No doubt there was much, in theory, that they had in common; and the issues which divided
them seemed unimportant to most of their followers. But in practical politics they were poles apart,
because Marx was for the bourgeoisie against the Prussian State, whereas Lassalle was fully prepared to side
with the Prussian State against the bourgeoisie." Cole, A History of Socialist Thought: Socialist Thought,
Marxism and Anarchism, 1850-1890, vol. 2, Macmillan, London, 1954, p. 72.
66. Mehring, op. cit., pp. 271-72.
67. See Horace Davis, "Nations, Colonies and Social Classes: The Position of Marx and Engels," Science
and Society 29, no. 1 (Winter 1965): 42; Anthony Smith, op. cit., p. 301; and Solomon Bloom, The World of
Nations, Columbia University Press, New York, 1941,p. 194. (Bloom would prefer to see Marx as a "jealous"
personality in his differences with Lassalle than attribute them to Marx's nationalism though Bloom's
evidence-as Davis suggests-supports the latter interpretation.)
68. For more on Marx's political ambitions, see McLellan, Karl Marx, op. cit., p. 378; and Cole, A History
of Socialist Thought, op. cit., 2:74.
69. Karl Marx, Capital, International Publishers, New York, 1977, ~ 7 3 7 .
70. Ibid., pp. 747-48.
71. Ibid., p. 754.
72. Ibid., p. 757.
73. In 1887188, Engels would write: "Since the end of the Middle Ages, history had been moving towards
a Europe made up of large, national states. Only such national states constitute the normal political
framework for the dominant European bourgeois class . . ., and, in addition, they are the indispensable
prerequisite for the establishment of the harmonious international collaboration of nations without which
the rule of the proletariat cannot exist.'' Engels, The Role ofForce in History, International Publishers, New
York, 1972, pp. 29-30.
74. In May 1875, Marx wrote to the Esenach faction of the German Social Democratic Movement: "The
German workers' party. . . shows that its socialist ideas are not even skin-deep; in that, instead of treating
existing society. . . as the basis of the existing state . . . , it treats the state rather as [an] independent entity
that possesses its own intellectual, ethical and libertarian bases. . . . 'Present-day society' is capitalist society,
which exists in all civilized countries, more or less free from medieval admixture, more or less modified by
the special historical development of each country, more or less developed." Marx, "Critique of the Gotha
Program," in Robert Tucker (ed.), The Marx-Engels Reader, op. cit., p. 394.
75. "The bourgeois period of history has to create the material basis of the new world-on the one hand
332

NOTES T O PAGES 5 4 - 5 8

the universal intercourse founded upon the mutual dependency of mankind, and the means of that
intercourse; on the other hand the development of the productive powers of man and the transformation
of material production into a scientific domination of natural agencies." Marx, "The Future Results of
British Rule in India:' in Shlomo Avineri, Karl Marx on Colonialism and Modernization, Doubleday,
Garden City, 1968, p. 138.
76. Karl Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848-50, in Saul Padover (ed.), Karl Marx: On Revolution,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1971, p. 162.
77. Karl Marx, The Communist Manifesto, op. cit., p. 339. For Lichtheim, see his Marxism: An Historical
and Political Study, op. cit., p. 86.
78. "The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by the immensely
facilitated means of communication, draws all, even the most barbarian, nations into civilization." Marx,
The Communist Manifesto, op. cit., p. 339.
79. "The bourgeoisie finds itself involved in a constant battle. At first with the aristocracy; later on, with
those portions of the bourgeoisie itself, whose interests have become antagonistic to the progress of
industry; at all times, with the bourgeoisie of foreign countries." Ibid., p. 343.
80. Ibid., p. 339.
81. Lichtheim surmises that: "Unlike the majority of German political theorists of his age, notably the
liberals, Marx regarded England rather than France as the exception from the general European rule.
France was the 'classical' case: just as in medieval times it had been the centre of feudalism, so now its
national life provided the clearest possible view of the class conflicts which were splitting society apart,
even though economically Britain was further advanced along the same road. But France was also the
'model' in that its political institutions had been refashioned by the greatest and most successful of
'bourgeois revolutions.' " Lichtheim, Marxism: An Historical and Critical Study, op. cit., pp. 86-87.
82. Shlomo Aveneri, Karl Marx on Colonialism andModernization, op. cit., p. 469; see also Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels, Tne Russian Menace to Europe, Paul Blackstock and Bert Hoselitz (eds.), Free Press,
Glencoe, 1952, pp. 216-18,274-75.
83. Marx and Engels, The Russian Menace, op. cit., p. 278; see ibid., p. 280 for the English translation of
the German editions of 1867 and 1872.
84. Lichtheim makes the interesting observation that: "Having with some reluctance adopted the view
that national emancipation in Ireland must precede democratic revolution in England, and not vice versa,
Marx continued to advocate a federal relationship between the two countries rather than complete separation. This later became the standard Social-Democratic approach to nationality questions and even found
a dim echo in Leninism." Lichtheim, Marxism: An Historical and Critical Study, op. cit., p. 84.
85. Engels, The Role of Force in History, op. cit., pp. 34-35. For a discussion of Marx and Engels as
German nationalists (and particularly Engels's transformation from young nationalist to internationalist),
see Horace Davis, op. cit., pp. 44-51.
86. See Lichtheim, Marxism: An Historical and Critical Study, op. cit., p. 85; Horace Davis, Nationalism
and Socialism, Monthly Review, New York, 1967, pp. 3, 22-23, 218; and Mihailo Makovic, "Stalinism and
Marxism," in Robert Tucker, Stalinism, W. W. Norton, New York, 1977. pp. 315-17. (Makovic suggests that
Engels's attitude was formed during the 184811849 revolutions when counter-revolutionary armies were
organized among the Slavs to repress social movements in central and eastern Europe.)
87. See Marx and Engels, Ireland and the Irish Question, op. cit.
88. See Michael Lowy, "Marxists and the National Question," New Left Review, no. 96 (MarchIApril
1976): 82-83.
89. See Horace Davis, "Nations, Colonies and Social Classes: The Position of Marx and Engels," op. cit.,
pp. 28-31.
90. Engels, "The Magyar Struggle:' in Marx and Engels, The Revolutions of 1848, International Publishers, New York, 1973, p p 221-23.
91. "[Tlhere was a tendency towards economism in his idea that the 'standardization of industrial
production and corresponding living conditions' helps to dissolve national barriers . . . and antagonisms,
as though national differences could be equated simply with differences in the production process." Lowy,
op. cit., p. 82.
92. "[Sluch an argument owed more to the conservative principles of the historical school of law
(Savigny, etc.) than to the revolutionary ideas of historical materialism." Ibid., p. 84.
93. Horace Davis, Nationalism and Socialism, Monthly Review Press, New York, 1967, pp. 50-51.
94. Davis, ibid., p. 57.
95. See "The National Question:' an appendix to Peter Nettl's Rosa Luxemburg, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1969, pp. 500-519.
96. See Lowy, op. cit., p. 91; and George Haupt, Michael Lowy, Claudie Weill, Les Marxistes et la Question
Nationale, Fran~oisMaspero, Paris, 1974, pp. 50-52.
97. Lowy, op. cit., pp. 93-94; and Haupt, Lowy, Weill, op. cit., pp. 23, 30, 45-50; see also J. V. Stalin,
"Marxism and the National Question," in Works, Foreign Languages, Moscow, 1953, 2:300-381.
N O T E S T O PAGES 5 8 - 6 2

333

98. Franz Borkenau, World Communism, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1971 (orig. 1939), p.
94.
99. Lowy, op. cit., pp. 89-91.
loo. Ibid., p. go.
101. Ibid., p. 96; and Haupt, Lowy, Weill, op. cit., pp. 52-61.
102. Joseph Stalin, "Marxism and the National Question," op. cit., p. 307. Lowy erroneously (op. cit.)
argues that Lenin had several occasions to refer to Stalin's work but was never terribly excited by it. Lenin's
attitude may be illustrated by the remarks found in note 130, Stalin, ibid., pp. 417-18.
103. Ibid., p. 321.
104. Tom Nairn, "The Modern Janus," New Left Review, no. 94 (November-December 1975): 21.
105. Ibid., pp. lo, 1 2 , ~ .
106. Jean Baudrillard, The Mirror ofProduction, Telos, St. Louis, 1975, p. 33.
107. Alex Callinicos, Althusser's Marxism, NLB, London, 1976, p. 87.
108. Theodore Draper, The Roots ofAmerican Communism, Viking, New York, 1957, chap. 5.
109. Letter to Joseph Bloch, 21/22 September 1890, in Tucker (ed.), The Marx-Engels Reader, op. cit., p.
642.
no. Letter to Franz Mehring, 14 July 1893, ibid., p. 650.
111. Nairn, op. cit., p. 25.
112. Ibid., p. 17.
113. Raymond Williams has written: "[Tlhe reason for the . . . weakness in Marxism is not difficult to
find: it lay in the received formula of base and superstructure, which in ordinary hands converted very
quickly to an interpretation of superstructure a simple reflection, representation, ideological expression."
Williams, "Literature and Sociology," New Left Review, no. 67 (May-June 1971): 9.
114. Georg Luucs, op. cit., pp. 110-49.

Chapter Four
1. For example, E. David Cronon remarks as late as 1972: "Garvey appeared fortuitously at a time when
the Negro masses were awaiting a black Moses, and he became the instrument through which they could
express their longings and deep discontent. The current of black nationalism which he helped to set in
motion has not yet run its course, for, as one of his followers once boasted, Marcus Garvey opened
windows in the minds of Negroes." ("Afterword: An Enduring Legacy," in E. David Cronon (ed.), Marcus
Garvey, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1972, p. 168). Cronon sustains this interpretation of Garvey's as a
unique historical entity from his earlier study: Black Moses: The Story ofMarcus Garvey and the Universal
Negro Improvement Association, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1955. By distinguishing Garvey in
this way, Cronon constructed a personality and characterized a social ideology cut off from the historical
roots suggested by one of his own contributors, George Shepperson ("Garvey as Pan-Africanist," in
Cronon (ed.), Marcus Garvey, op. cit., pp. 144-47). More significantly, he ignored the broader historical
vision articulated by C. L. R. James as early as 1938: "Though often retarded and sometimes diverted, the
current of history, observed from an eminence, can be seen to unite strange and diverse tributaries in its
own embracing logic. The San Domingo revolutionaries, the black arm in the Civil War, were unconscious
but potent levers in two great propulsions forward of modern civilization. . . . This it is which lifts out of
bleakness and invests with meaning a record of failure almost unrelieved. The African bruises and breaks
himself against his bars in the interest of freedoms wider than his own." C. L. R. James, A History of PanAfrican Revolt, Drum and Spear, Washington, D.C., 1969 (originally published in 1938),pp. 99-100.
2. Though Theodore Draper (The Rediscovery of Black Nationalism, Secker and Warburg, London, 1971)
was one of the first post-war historians to "discover" a nationalist tradition-he traces the beginnings of
Black nationalism to the "migrationism" or "emigrationism" (p. 4) of the late eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries-his work was a bit polemical. Positing the existence of two opposing manifestations
of Black nationalism: "emigrationism" and "internal statism," Draper argues that Black nationalism was
always of limited significance among Blacks. The care with which his investigation was conducted is
perhaps best seen by reviewing his treatment of the nineteenth-century emigration movement. In general,
his analysis suffers from a disorganized emphasis on the opinions and actions of Black freemen and rather
questionable "samples" of mass opinion: "The great mass of American Negroes preferred to wage an uphill
battle to become part of the nationalism where they were born rather than to take the risk of losing what
they had without gaining what they were promised (p. 12). The "great mass" that Draper refers to was of
course the almost half million Free Blacks of the antebellum period. His "sampling" seems to have been
confined to the limited successes of the American Society for Colonizing the Free People of Color in the
United States (approximately n,ooo Black colonists in the first fifty years since its inception in 1817); a
smattering of anticolonization declarations; the ambivalence of Martin Delaney (pp. 21-41); and the
pragmatic reservations of procolonizationists such as Henry Turner, James T. Holly, and Henry H. Garnet
(pp. 42-47). Though Draper acknowledges that at least io,ooo Blacks emigrated to Haiti in the early

334

NOTES TO PAGES 6 2 - 7 2

nineteenth century and a similar number to Canada (p. 19); that opposition to colonization was sometimes
tactical (to maintain pressure against slavery), sometimes based on distorted images of Africa (p. 18) or
class-specific interests of an emerging Negro "middle class" (pp. 45-46), somehow a few dozen instances of
anti-colonization declarations and a treatment of emigrationist movements that is dominated by a reconstruction of Delany's political activity (20 of 33 pages) are allowed more weight than the tens of thousands
who emigrated in the early nineteenth century and the untold numbers who took their leaves of the United
States (and sometimes the New World) both earlier (see Immanuel Geiss, The Pan-African Movement,
Methuen, London, 1974, pp. 52-57; and Floyd Miller, The Search for a Black Nationality, University of
Illinois Press, Urbana, 1975) and later (William Bittle and Gilbert Geis, The Longest Way Home, Wayne State
University Press, Detroit, 1964; and Edwin Redkey, Black Exodus, Yale University Press, New Haven, 1969).
Draper's emphasis on the opposition to the Colonization Society does not account for the proliferation of
Black emigration societies and movements, nor the distinction then drawn between African colonization
and interests in Haiti, Canada, Latin America, Ohio, and the Western Frontier as sites of future settlement.
If Delaney was an ambivalent supporter of emigration, James Forten and Richard Allen were ambivalent
opponents (see Miller, op. cit.). Draper relies on Louis Mehlinger's "The Attitudes of the Free Negro
toward African Colonization" (JournalofNegro History 1, no. 3 [July 19161: 176-301) for evidence of mass
rejection of the Colonization Society. He might have pointed out that Mehlinger's basic source is William
Lloyd Garrison's Thoughts on African Colonization (Garrison and Knapp, Boston, 1832), and Thoughts on
Colonization, which recorded protests not entirely uninfluenced by Garrison: "William Lloyd Garrison
orchestrated numerous black protest meetings announcing that blacks would not leave the United States"
(Miller, op. cit., p. 55). (Garrison, in turn, had been convinced of the society's purportedly racist duplicity
by the Black ex-colonizationists Forten and Allen; see William L. Katz, "Earliest Responses of American
Negroes and Whites to African Colonization," introduction to Garrison's Thoughts on African Colonization, Arno, New York, 1968, pp. i-xi. Even so, Mehlinger cites numerous instances of southern and
northern Black support for colonization, though he neglects to mention the (negative) effects of unsuccessful Haitian emigration in the 1820s (ibid., pp. 74-82) or their role in pushing abolitionists from
gradualist positions on slavery to "immediatism" (ibid., p. 90; and John L. Thomas, The Liberator: William
Lloyd Garrison, Little, Brown, Boston, 1963,p. 465,26n). Draper seems to also have been convinced that the
merits of emigration, colonization, and internal statism could be determined by identifying them as
originally "white fantasies" (Draper, op. cit., pp. 13, 14, 48, 57). The example of Draper is apparently
contagious: see, for example, Raymond Hall, Black Separatism in the United States, University Press of New
England, Hanover, 1978, pp. zi,33-37. Like Draper, Hall makes no larger effort to discover the sentiments
of those Blacks (slave or freemen) who were beyond the strata of elites who consequently dominate the
historical record. Redkey's study of the 1890-1910 period is one attempt to extend this question: "Whether
he knew it or not, Garvey was part of a long tradition of black nationalism in the United States. Garvey's
followers, moreover, were the same Southern black marginal farmers who had responded to the emigration appeals of Bishop Turner and his followers a generation earlier. . . . In the pattern of earlier African
emigration movements, the lower-class blacks responded eagerly when flamboyant Marcus Garvey pointed
the way. No longer isolated on scattered farms and restrained by southern conditions as Turner's followers
had been, the black proletariat, crowded into urban ghettoes and disillusioned with their new homes,
spread nationalism far and fast. Garvey himself may have been a foreigner but his millions of supporters
manifested an old American response of black nationalism." Redkey, op. cit., p. 294.
3. In an otherwise remarkable work, E. U. Essien-Udom, in his study of the Black American Muslim
movement tracing its Black nationalist roots to early nineteenth-century "Negro rationalism" (Paul Cuffe
and the emigration movement), distinguished Negro nationalism as an exclusive concern for the welfare of
American Blacks, Black Nationalism, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1962, pp. 17-19. Cuffe himself
declared his interest differently: "Having been informed that there was a settlement of people of colour at
Sierra Leone under the immediate guardianship of a civilized power, I have for these many years past felt a
lively interest in their behalf, wishing that the inhabitants of the colony might become established in the
truth, and thereby be instrumental in its promotion amongst our African brethren"; even making an effort
during this visit (1810-11) to the colony to dissuade the "Mendingo Tribe" from further involvement in the
slave trade: "As they themselves were not willing to submit to the bonds of slavery, I endeavoured to hold
this out as a light to convince them of their error. But the prejudice of education had taken too firm hold of
their minds to admit of much effect from reason on this subject." Paul Cuffe, "A Brief Account of the
Settlement and Present Situation of the Colony of Sierra Leone in Africa," in Adelaide C. Hill and Martin
Kilson (eds.), Apropos ofAfrica, Frank Cass, London, 1969, pp. 141718. For the neglect of the historical tradition of Black radicalism, see the bibliographic essays of Redkey, op.
cit., p. 312; and Miller, op. cit., p. 281.
4. Walter Rodney, "Upper Guinea and the Significance of the Origins of Africans Enslaved in the New
World," Journal ofNegro History 54, no. 4 (October 1969):345.
5. G. W. F. Hegel, The Philosophy ofHistory (ed.) C. J.Friedrich, Dover, New York, 1956: pp. 80,93,96,99.
Interestingly enough, Johann Gottfried von Herder, the eighteenth-century German thinker whose work
NOTES T O PAGES 7 2 - 7 4

335

Hegel knew well (we are told that Hegel never acknowledged Herder's influence), was one of the rare
European philosophers who attempted to come to terms with national traditions beyond that of Europe:
"[Hlow seldom does an European hear from the native of any country the praise, 'he is a rational man like
us!' " And further: "The European has no idea of the boiling passions and imaginations, that glow in the
Negro's breast; and the Hindoo has no conception of the restless desires, that chase the European from one
end of the World to the other." Herder, Repections on the Philosophy of the History ofMankind, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1968 (orig. 1784- 91), pp. 32 and 75 respectively. For Hegel's relationship with
Herder, see Frank Manuel's introduction, ibid., p. xvii.
6. Winthrop Jordan reminds us of the antiquity of these notions in his treatment of David Hume's
"valuation of color": "Hume was convinced that the peoples near the poles and in the tropics were
essentially inferior to those in the temperate zones, a conviction which can be traced historically back
through European thought to the Greeks-who also lived in a temperate climate. What Hume did in 1748,
though, was to go ancient philosophers one better by hitching superiority to complexion." Jordan then
goes on to quote Hume directly: "I am apt to suspect the negroes, and in general all the other species of
men (for there are four or five different kinds) to be naturally inferior to the whites. There never was a
civilized nation of any other complexion than white, nor even any individual eminent either in action or
speculation. No ingenious manufactures amongst them, no arts, no sciences." Jordan, White Over Black,
Penguin, Baltimore, 1969, p. 253. (Neither M. L. Finley or Frank Snowden would agree with Jordan's
interpretation of racial thought among the "ancients." Both argue that the racial awareness of the Greeks
and Romans tended to be objective rather than irrational. For Finley, see "Between Slavery and Freedom,"
Comparative Studies in Society and History 6, no. 3 (April 1964): 246; and for Snowden, Blacks in Antiquity,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1970, pp. 176-95. (Jordan's view corresponds with that of Friedrich
Hertz according to Louis Ruchames: Racial Thought in America, Grossett and Dunlap, New York, 1969, pp.
1-2.) Since a complete demonstration of the frequency with which European historians and social analysts
have relied upon a Eurocentric worldview for the basis of their work would be tedious because of the very
nature of its dimensions, a few instances drawn from the works of eminent scholars should suffice. Moving
forward from Hegel and Hume, there is Edward H. Carr's widely praised collection of Cambridge lectures,
WhatIs History? (Vintage, New York, 1961). In his final lecture, Carr observed: "It is only within the last two
hundred years at most, even in a few advanced countries, that social, political, and historical consciousness
has begun to spread to anything hke a majority of the population. It is only today that it has become
possible for the first time even to imagine a whole world consisting of peoples who have in the fullest sense
entered into history and become the concern, no longer of the colonial administrator or of the anthropologist, but of the historian" (p. 199). In 1969, Boniface Obichere, a Nigerian professor of history, recalled that:
"The present Regius Professor of Modern History at Oxford, Hugh Trevor-Roper, expressed the opinion
that he didn't think Africa and Asia had any history, except that history which began with European
enterprise in these places." And further, "that the whole of African history was, in the words of Professors
R. Robinson and J. A. Gallagher in Africa and the Victorians,'a gigantic footnote'; to something that Britain
was doing in Asia or in England, and so on." Obichere, "African History and Western Civilization," in
Armstead Robinson, Craig Foster, and Donald Ogilvie (eds.), Black Studies in the University, Bantam, New
York, 1969, pp. 87, 88, respectively. An examination of Trevor-Roper's lecture indicates that Obichere's
accusation was a bit on the generous side: "Perhaps, in the future, there will be some African history to
teach. But at present there is none: there is only the history of the Europeans in Africa. The rest is darkness,
like the history of pre-European, pre-Columbian America. And darkness is not a subject of history. Please
do not misunderstand me. I do not deny that men existed even in dark countries and dark centuries, nor
that they had political life and culture, interesting to sociologists and anthropologists; but history, I believe,
is essentially a form of movement, and purposive movement too. It is not a mere phantasmagoria of
changing shapes and costumes, of battles and conquests, dynasties and usurpations, social forms and social
disintegration. . . . [Wje may neglect our own history and amuse ourselves with the unrewarding gyrations
of barbarous tribes in picturesque but irrelevant corners of the globe: tribes whose chief function in
history, in my opinion, is to show to the present an image of the past from which, by history, it has escaped;
or shall I seek to avoid the indignation of the medievalists by saying, from which it has changed? "The Rise
of Christian Europe I: The Great Recovery," in The Listener, 28 November 1963, p. 871. For a summary of
the development of European thought on non-Western peoples, see Philip Curtin's "Introduction: Imperialism as Intellectual History," in Curtin (ed.), Imperialism, Walker, New York, 1971, pp. xiii-xvii. For
specific instances in the social sciences, see Bernard Magubanc, "A Critical Look at Indices Used in the
Study of Social Change in Colonial Africa," Current Anthropology 12, nos. 4- j (October-December 1971):
419-31.
7. In some sense, even the most careful scholars are still reluctant in their recognition of the European
precedents for a slave system of African labor. Edmund Morgan, for example in his study of colonial
Virginia, in summarizing the character of "private enterprise" in the colony conjectures: "We may also see
Virginians beginning to move toward a system of labor that treated men as things." Though it sounds like
Morgan is describing the initial beginnings of this system, this is difficult to square with the evidence he
336

NOTES TO PAGE 7 4

himself has amassed, which led him (one paragraph earlier) to observe: "A servant, by going to Virginia,
became for a number of years a thing, a commodity with a price." Further, Morgan had already encountered this system in the mother country: "In England itself, after labor became more valuable, the demand
produced a certain amount of buying and selling of industrial apprentices." Edmund Morgan, American
Slavery, American Freedom, W. W. Norton, New York, 1975, pp. 129 and 128, respectively. The imprimatur of
the racial order that had developed for centuries within Europe was decidedly on the mind of Benjamin
Franklin when he wrote: "The Number of purely white People in the World is proportionately very small.
All Africa is black or tawny. Asia chiefly tawny. America (exclusive of the new Comers) wholly so. And in
Europe, the Spaniards, Italians, French, Russians and Swedes, are generally of what we call a swarthy
Complexion; as are the Germans also, the Saxons only excepted, who with the English, make the principal
Body of White People on the Face of the Earth. I could wish their Numbers were increased." Quoted by
Winthrop Jordan, op. cit., p. 254. As Jordan commented, "if Europeans were white, some were whiter than
others" (ibid.).
8. "Uncle Tom at Home," anonymous contributor, Putnami Monthly 8, no. 43 (July 1856): 4-5. The
article is a classic example of wrong-headed erudition; its author leaning heavily on the accounts of
scientific explorers (for example, Heinrich Barth's Travels and Discoveries in North and Central Africa, 5
vols, Longmans Green, London, 1857),and military adventurers (Major Denham, Captain Clapperton, and
the late Dr. Oudney, Travels and Discoveries in Northern and Central Africa, 4 vols., John Murray, London,
1831). In the short career of Putnam's Monthly (1853-58 before being absorbed by Emerson's; and a second
series, 1958-71 before being purchased by Scribner's), it effectively challenged the cream of literary magazines being produced in New York (its own base of operation) and Boston (see Algernon Tassin, The
Magazine in America, Dodd, Mead, New York, 1916, pp. 205-31, 315). Ironically, despite its editorial
sympathies with Negrophobia, and the frequency with which it published contributions from writers in
the "slave states," it did not escape the scorn of southern literati. (See Frank L. Mott, A History ofAmerican
Magazines, 1741-1850, vol. 1, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1939, p. 648; "A Special Editorial Note
for the People South of Mason and Dixon's Line," Putnam's Monthly 3, no. 15 [March 18541: 343-44; and
Tassin, op. cit., p. 186.)
9. For the background and general character of reaction to the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, see Mary F.
Berry, Black Resistance, White Law, Appleton-Century-Croft, New York, 1971, pp. 72-77; and John Hope
Franktin, From Slavery to Freedom, Knopf, New York, 1967, pp. 260-66, 367-70. For another interesting
account see William 2. Foster, The Negro People in American History, International, New York, 1970, pp.
167-71. Foster particularly emphasizes the violence that accompanied the passage and implementation of
the act; violence that was both resistant and compliant in cause. Relying on the first issue of the New York
Times (18 September 1851), Foster unfortunately confuses the events at Christiana, Pennsylvania, involving
William Parker. Foster identified Parker as a "free Negro" when the case was that Parker was a runaway
slave from Maryland. Moreover, it was Parker who had helped form a vigilante organization against slave
catching in the Christiana area. It was this group that organized the resistance to the Gorsuches' attempts
to reclaim their slave properties, killing the Gorsuches (Edward and Dickinson, father and son were killed;
a nephew, Joshua, was wounded) in the process. See William Parker's account "Fugitives Resist Kidnapping," in Charles Nichols (ed.), Black Men in Chains, Lawrence Hill, New York, 1972, pp. 281-315. For John
Brown, see Stephen Oates, To Purge This Land with Blood, Harper Torchbooks, New York, 1970.
lo. Milton Cantor, in his essay on seventeenth-century America concludes that "The Negro then was
permanently bound by biological and anthropological chains. In order to guarantee the viability of his
debasement, pro-slavery writers pulled out all stops. Slavery was justified by climate and economi~necessity; by reliance upon history, the Bible, the Providential design. It was argued, in the colonial period, that
English America could not be developed without the peculiar institution. White men were physiologically
unable to labor in hot climates; Negroes alone had this power." Nor were these opinions limited to those
sympathetic to slavery: "So widespread was this conviction of inequality that many anti-slavery writers
acknowledged it." "The Image of the Negro in Colonial Literature," in Seymour Gross and John Edward
Hardy (eds.), Images of The Negro in American Literature, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1966, pp. 43
and 31, respectively. See also Matthew Mellon, Early American Views on Negro Slavery, Bergman, New York,
1969; and Jordan, op. cit., pp. 253-55,286,305-7.
11. David Brion Davis, The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1966,
P. 453.
12. "[Iln order to maintain its income without sacrifice or exertion, the South fell back on a doctrine of
racial differences which it asserted made higher intelligence and increased efficiency impossible for Negro
labour. Wishing such an excuse for lazy indulgence, the planter easily found, invented and proved it. His
subservient religious leaders reverted to the 'Curse of Canaan'; his pseudo-scientists gathered and supplemented all available doctrines of race inferiority; his scattered schools and pedantic periodicals repeated
these legends, until for the average planter born after 1840 it was impossible not to believe that all valid laws
in psychology, economics and politics stopped with the Negro race." W. E. B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction
in America, 1860-1880, World Publishing, Cleveland, 1969, pp. 30-39 Benita Parry has discovered that the
NOTES TO PAGES 7 4 - 7 5

337

Anglo community in India and its British home intelligentsia produced similar "legends" concerning the
Indian; see Delusions and Discoveries, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1972, pp. 1-70.
13. David Brion Davis, op. cit., pp. 464-82; Cantor, op. cit., p. 53; and Jordan, op. cit., ch. 13.
14. Davis comments that "one of the most comprehensive modern studies of a West African culture
presents a picture strikingly similar to that of eighteenth-century accounts." Davis, op. cit., p. 465. Davis is
referring, in the former, to the work of Melville and Frances Herskovitts (see ibid., note 47).
15. Ibid.
16. In his preface, Davis stated: "I hope to demonstrate that slavery has always been a source of social and
psychological tension, but that in Western culture it was associated with certain religious and philosophical
doctrines that gave it the highest sanction. The underlying contradiction of slavery became more manifest
when the institution was closely linked with American colonization, which was also seen as affording
mankind the opportunity to create a more perfect society." Ibid., p. ix.
17. "[Tlhe historian, rather like the modern student of race-awareness in very young children, must
remain tentative and indeed baffled as to whether white men originally responded adversely to the
Negro's color because of strictly accidental prior culture valuation of blackness per se, instinctual repulsion
founded on physiological processes or perhaps fear of the night which may have had adaptive value in
human evolution, the association of dirt and darkened complexion with the lower classes in Europe, or
association of blackness with Negroes who were inferior in culture or status." Jordan, op. cit., p. 257.
18. Davis, op. cit., p. 447.
19. Ibid., pp. 455-59.
20. Brian Street, in his reconstruction of the history of the relationship between scientific thought and
the racial theories that wove through English literature of the Victorian period, concludes: "The link
between race and culture, physical and mental qualities, having been established, any subjective feelings
with regard to the 'character' of other races can be given scientific backing. If the criteria for distinguishing
between races of men depended upon such subjective considerations, Voltaire and Rousseau could claim
that Negroes were naturally inferior to Europeans in mental ability, and Hume that 'there never was a
civilised nation of any other complexion than white' . . . ,with as much justification as Blumenbach could
claim that the Caucasian was the most beautiful. . . chauvinism was rendered in 'scientific' terms in the late
nineteenth century." The Savage in Literature, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1975, p p 54-55. In 1894,
Sir Harry Johnston, the first Commissioner of British Central Africa, broke through a particular barrier of
racial theory by posing one solution to the otherwise hopeless future of the inferior races: "On the whole I
think the admixture of yellow that the negro requires should come from India, and that Eastern Africa and
British Central Africa should become the America of the Hindu. The mixture of the two races would give
the Indian the physical development which he lacks, and he in his turn would transmit to his half negro
offspring the industry, ambition, and aspiration towards a civilized life which the negro so markedly lacks."
Quoted by H. Alan Cairns, Prelude to Imperialism, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1965, p. 207.
21. See Michael Banton and Jonathan Harwood, The Race Concept, Praeger, New York, 1975, pp. 13-42.
Philip Curtin reminds us that "aboriginal mortality" was taken as one proof of the natural racial order by
nineteenth-century British scientists: "The exterminated people were all of 'the colored races,' while the
exterminators always appeared to be European. It seemed obvious that some natural law of race relations
was at work, that the extinction of the non-Europeans was part of the natural evolution of the world." The
Image ofAfrica, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1964, p. 374.
22. See Wesley Frank Craven, The Legend of the Founding Fathers, New York University Press, New York,
1956, PP. 39-44,56-85.
23. It is still possible to discover examples or variations of the legend of American foundations in
contemporary textbooks. When Milton Cummings and David Wise, under the subtitle "The paradox of
colonial democracy:' state that "Colonial America was not a very democratic place by contemporary
standards:' their suggestion is that a defense exists of colonial society in its own terms (not to mention the
implication that the more contemporary standards of democracy have been achieved). See Cummings and
Wise, Democracy Under Pressure, Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, New York, 1977, p. 38. Whatever Cummings
and Wise imagine the standards of the seventeenth century to be, they could hardly be described as
democratic or the basis for paradox: "Virginians could be so heavily exploited, legally and illegally, partly
because they were selected for that purpose: they were brought to the colony in order to be exploited. From
the beginning Englishmen had thought of their New World possessions as a place in which to make use of
people who were useless at home." Morgan, op. cit., p. 235. "Our first settlers brought with them across the
ocean the class distinctions of the Old World. The American wilderness modified and complicated these
distinctions, but it did not eliminate them. And the more the population grew-the greater the wealth, the
more complex the society-the sharper became the differences between upper and lower classes. The white
indentured servant supplied the basic lower-class labor force in the seventeenth century, the Negro slave in
the eighteenth century, both supplemented by town laborers of various types." Howard Zinn, The Politics
of History, Beacon Press, Boston, 1970, p. 60.
24. Roy Nichols tells us that in the 1850s "Thirty-one of these state parties, plus some more or less fluid
3 3 8 NOTES TO PAGES 7 5 - 7 6

groups in the territories, acknowledged the name Democrat, and in national conventions styled themselves
the 'American Democracy.' " These were, in spite of their informal pretensions, minority parties, representing specific interests and particular regions. The strains of sectional disputes over the organization of new
territories tore through this fabric of compromise in the 1850s. "The opponents of the Democrats were
beginning to make this appeal. Pleas were heard for the acceptance of the democratic principle as the
means of substituting fair play for the fractious negativism of minorities; there was no more equitable rule
than the will of the majority. Such sporting words, however, did not make southerners forget the warning
of the census. If the voice of the majority became the will of the Republic, they might well be at the mercy of
their free state neighbors. They feared the tyranny of numbers. Plainly the effort by northern spokesmen to
make democracy a cohesive formula would have only slightly more chance of success than the labor of
their southern antagonists to secure the acceptance of regionalism and the recognition of the right of
minority veto." It appears that slight as it was, this "chance" was too large a risk for the southern ruling
class. It became one factor that led to the Civil War. Nichols, The Disruption ofAmerican Democracy,
Collier Books, New York, 1962, pp. 20 and 52, respectively.
25. Edmund Morgan, op. cit., p. go. A little later, Morgan would put these attitudes in more political and
racial terms: "The standard justification of slavery in the seventeenth centurywas that captives taken in war
had forfeited their lives and might be enslaved. Yet Englishmen did not think of enslaving prisoners in
European wars. . . . There was something different about the Indians. Whatever the particular nation or
tribe or group they belonged to, they were not civil, not Christian; perhaps not quite human in the way that
white Christian Europeans were. It was no good trying to give them a stake in society-they stood outside
society." Ibid., p. 233.
26. Franklin, "Observations concerning the increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, &c:' in The
Papers of Benjamin Franklin, Leonard W. Labaree (ed.), Yale University Press, New Haven, 1961, p. 228.
Franklin concluded this essay with: "And while we are, as I may call it, Scouring our Planet, by clearing
America of Woods, and so making this Side of our Globe reflect a brighter Light to the Eyes of Inhabitants
in Mars or Venus, why should we in the Sight of Superior Beings, darken its People? why increase the Sons
of Africa, by Planting them in America, where we have so fair an Opportunity, by excluding all Blacks and
Tawneys, of increasing the lovely White and Red? But perhaps I am partial to the Complexion of my
Country, for such Kind of Partiality is natural to Mankind." Ibid., p. 234.
27. See Morgan, op. cit., pp. 327-37,305-15. Reviewing the court records of Lancaster County, Virginia,
Smith concludes: "In 1757there were no servant cases, nor in 1764, from which it may be inferred that slaves
had practically replaced white servants. . . . These figures are fairly typical, as far as I can discover, of any
colonial county in those regions." A. E. Smith, op. cit., p. 278.
28. Hofstadter, America at 1750. Alfred Knopf, New York, 1971, p. 34.
29. See A. E. Smith, op. cit., chapters 11and 12; Hofstadter, op. cit., pp. 49-58. In her attempt to assess the
extent to which the ruling class was exclusionist during the heady period of the revolutionary era, Linda
Grant De Pauw noted an extraordinary conservatism among her academic predecessors who had studied
the period: "The most extreme estimate of unfreedom in colonial America I have found is that of Howard
Zinn who estimates that the proportion of the population in 'physical or economic bondage' was 'about
one-third of the total,' " Howard Zinn, The Politics of History, Beacon Press, Boston, 1970, p. 60. De Pauw,
"Land of the Unfree: Legal Limitations on Liberty in Pre-revolutionary America:' Maryland Historical
Magazine 68, no. 4 (Winter 1973): 356, n. 9. As the quote that follows in the text above indicates, De Pauw
was much less sanguine.
30. De Pauw, op. cit., p. 356. Ferdinand Lundberg, Cracks in the Constitution, Lyle Stuart, New York, 1980,
p. 18.
31. "[Ilf 'democracy' implies government by consent of the governed or at least by consent of a majority
of those governed and not merely of an adult white male elite, then those historians from Bancroft to
Brown who have described American society of the mid-eighteenth century as 'democratic' are simply
wrong." Ibid., p. 368.
32. See Morgan, op. cit., pp. 250-70.
33. A. E. Smith, op. cit., p. 285; Hofstadter, op. cit., p. 34.
34. Smith, op. cit., pp. 286-88.
35. Hofstadter, op. cit., p. 34.
36. "The vast majority of them worked out their time without suffering excessive cruelty or want,
received their freedom dues without suing for them, and left no evidences from which to tell the stories of
their careers. These points need to be emphasized, for nearly all accounts of white servitude are principally
based on the records of courts of justice." Smith, op. cit., p. 278.
37. Morgan is willing to argue that "In the eyes of unpoor Englishmen the poor bore many of the marks
of an alien race." Morgan, op. cit., pp. 325-26. In the next breath, however, he declares: "To be sure, poverty
was not genetically hereditary. . . . The poor were not born of another color than the rest of the population,
but legislation could offer a substitute for color" (ibid.). He appears to link specifically racial prejudice to
differences in color; that is without color, a prejudice may emerge that is only like racism: "The contempt
NOTES TO PAGES 7 7 - 7 9

339

that lay behind these proposals [the enslavement of the poor] and behind many of the workhouse schemes
is not easy to distinguish from the kind of contempt that today we call racism" (ibid., p. 325). The parallels
he pursues between English domination of the Irish in the sixteenth century and native Americans from
the seventeenth century on, however, would suggest otherwise, see ibid., p. zo. Here again, is an instance
where the existence of European racism toward other Europeans is simply denied in both analytical and
historical terms.
38. A. E. Smith, op. cit., pp. 288-89.
39. "Beginning in 1728, a vastly increased movement from Ireland began, and by far the greatest number
of servants and redemptioners came from that country during the eighteenth century. . . . The German
migration, second in volume only to the Irish, began also about 1720, reached its height in the middle of the
century, and did not, like the English and Irish, increase during the 1770s." Ibid., p. 336. See also Hofstadter,
op. cit., pp. 17-30.
40. Smith, op. cit., p. 134.
41. Ibid., p. 325.
42. Nicholas Canny, "The Ideology of English Colonization: From Ireland to America," William and
Mary Quarterly, 3d ser., vol. 30, no. 4 (October 1972):596-97.
43. Hofstadter, op. cit., pp. 19-24.
44. Quoted by Hofstadter, ibid., p. 32.
45. Samuel Krislov has recorded an interesting episode that confirms the growing concern for Black
resistance in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries: "In 1802 in a confidential letter to the
chairman of a Senate committee, Postmaster General Gideon Granger urged [passage of a Post Office
provision which forbade Black employment], suggesting there were objections to Negro mail carriers 'of a
nature too delicate to engraft into a report which may become public, yet too important to be omitted or
passed over without full consideration.' Such a role as distributing the mail might teach Negroes the
pernicious doctrine 'that a man's rights do not depend on his color.' The Postmaster General cautioned
against 'everything which tends to increase their knowledge of natural rights, of men and things, or that
affords them an opportunity of associating, acquiring and commuting sentiments, and of establishing a
chain or line of intelligence.' " Krislov, The Negro in Federal Employment, University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis, 1967, p. 9. The provision was passed and remained in law (if not in practice) until 1865. See
also Mary Frances Berry, op. cit., pp. 1-17.
46. Chief Justice Roger Taney of the U.S. Supreme Court, in the majority opinion made public in 1857
that settled Dred Scott v. Sanford, established this position as the law of the land until its effective repeal by
the Civil War Amendments. Taney, in summarizing "the public history of every European nation," argued
that the Constitution of the United States could not have encompassed rights for Blacks: "They had for
more than a century before been regarded as beings of an inferior order, and altogether unfit to associate
with the white race, either in social or political relations; and so far inferior, that they had no rights which
the white man was bound to respect; and that the negro might justly and lawfully be reduced to slavery for
his benefit." Further, "if the language, as understood in that day, would embrace them, the conduct of the
distinguished men who framed the Declaration of Independence would have been utterly and flagrantly
inconsistent with the principles they asserted; and instead of the sympathy of mankind, to which they so
confidently appealed, they would have deserved and received universal rebuke and reprobation. Yet the
men who framed this declaration were great men-high in literary acquirements-high in their sense of
honor, and incapable of asserting principles inconsistent with those on which they were acting. They
perfectly understood the meaning of the language they used, and how it would be understood by others;
and they knew that it would not in any part of the civilized world be supposed to embrace the negro race,
which, by common consent, had been excluded from civilized Governments and the family of nations, and
doomed to slavery." Ruchames, op. cit., pp. 398-400. Given his predilection for "public history," had the
subject of their social equality come before him, Taney could have come to similar conclusions about the
majority of those who were becoming members of the "white race." Prior to the forging of racial consensus, in both Europe and the New World, the "racial" inferiorities of most of these proto-whites was well
established by the literati and intelligentsia classes. Indeed, some of Taney's contemporaries did fear that
his decision suggested "that there were federal or state constitutional inhibitions on the power of the
northern states to preserve their free status, to protect their black and white populations within or outside
their domicile." William Wiecek, "Slavery and Abolition Before the United States Supreme Court, 18201860," Journal of American History 65, no. 1 (June 1978): 55. In a quite informative if sometimes curiously
written article on the legal history of slavery in the United States, A. E. Keir Nash reminds his readers that
the courts ofthe nation did not consistently distinguish the rights of whites from those of Black slaves and
Black free men. Nash, "Reason of Slavery: Understanding the Judicial Role in the Peculiar Institution:'
Vanderbilt Law Review 32, no. 1(January 1979):7-218. AS such, it would appear appropriate to assume that
the state systems of justice during the first half of the nineteenth century were not exclusively concerned
with "white dominance" as one of Nash's critics, Michael Hindus, has suggested. See Hindus, "Black Justice
Under White Law: Criminal Prosecutions of Blacks in Antebellum South Carolina," Journal of American
340

NOTES TO PAGES 79-81

History 63, no. 3 (December 1976): 599. Nash, however, while recognizing that there is something to the
notion that the history of criminal law in Western societies "reflects" the origins of that law in slave
punishments (for presumably enslaved Europeans) and the extension of these penalties "from the lowest
classes upwards through the social strata" (op. cit., p. 51, the suggestion originates with J. Thorsten Sellin in
his Slavery and the Penal System, Elseiver, New York, 1976, p. viii), never quite comes to terms with Hindus'
suggestion that another characteristic of the penal codes of the nineteenth century was class domination.
See Hindus, op. cit., pp. 575-76, note 30. Nash's avoidance of this interpretative possibility is perhaps most
dramatically displayed in one of the curiosities in his essay: the construction of a historically naive empiricist opponent (Nash terms this figure "the ameliorative Whig" and at other times a "silent southerner") for
his critics and academic competitors (op. cit., pp. 30-70). Since Nash's alter ego is largely satisfied in
confronting Nash's opponents with statistical sets of alternative "proofs:' the structural forms and historical processes transferred from the Old World and emergent in the New that provided nineteenth-century
America its political economy and the setting of its legal systems are largely ignored. Nash's "Whiggery," for
example, in assigning statistical integrity to numbers of convictions, acquittals, indictments, lengths of
sentence and the like, fails to take into account the peculiarities of the "crimes of speech"for which slaves
and Black free men were held responsible (Hindus, op. cit., pp. 587-89); the fact that slaves were whipped
on grounds of improper behavior after acquittals from criminal charges against them (ibid., p. 593); that
the numbers of executions of slave offenders were probably depressed by the likelihood of claims for
compensation from their owners (ibid., p. 596); and that trial evidence might be significantly distorted by
restrictions placed on slave testimony (ibid., p. 578).
47. Marx to P. V. Annenkov, Brussels, 28 December 1846, reprinted in Karl Marx, The Poverty of
Philosophy, International Publishers, New York, 1971, p. 188. A more frequently read treatment of slavery
and industrial capitalism can be found in Chapter 31 of Capital, where Marx argues: "The discovery of gold
and silver in America, the extirpation, enslavement and entombment in mines of the aboriginal population, the beginning of the conquest and looting of the East Indies the turning of Africa into a warren for the
commercial hunting of black-skins, signalised the rosy dawn of the era of capitalist production. These
idyllic proceedings are the chief momenta of primitive accumulation:' Marx, Capital, vol. 1, International
Publishers, New York, 1977, p. 751. There is much that is true here but also much that is not. A hundred
years after Marx described primitive accumulation and set it between the stages of feudalism and capitalism, Oliver C. Cox, the Black theorist, tried to correct Marx's error: "[Marx] begins his analysis of the
nature of capitalism almost where he might have ended it; and as is commonly the case in classical
economics, he relegates as subsidiary the very things which should have been the center of his study. . . . His
'primitive accumulation' is none other than fundamentally capitalist accumulation; and, to assume that
feudal society dissolved before capitalist society began is to over-emphasize the fragility of feudalism and to
discount its uses to the development of capitalism." Cox, Capitalism as a System, Monthly Review Press,
New York, 1964, pp. 213-14. Among many contemporary Marxists, however, there is still a tendency to
misconstrue the importance and application of the concept of primitive accumulation. Charles Post, for
instance, in a recent article on capitalism in nineteenth-century America seems content to conceptualize
slave labor power in terms of primitive accumulation while entirely ignoring its application to "immigrant
labour power." See Post, "The American Road to Capitalism," New Left Review133 (May-June 1982):31-35,
44-45.
48. Eugene Genovese and Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, as two of the more prominent of American historians
who identify their work with the analytical categories and relationships associated with Marx, appear
highly ambiguous on the relationship between slave production and industrialization. Their remarks
consistently distinguish parts of an international or world economic system from other parts according to
modes of production. Thus recently they have distinguished between "the slave economies of the New
World," and "the free labor economies" of North America and Europe. The logical thrust of their argument
transforms these distinctions into oppositions between slavery ("pre-capitalist" or "archaic relations of
production") and industrialization within particular "economics" (e.g., the American South). The consequence, in the work of the Genoveses, is an aborted design of the eighteenth- and nineteenth-centuries'
world system substantiated by a foreshortened sense of the system's historical development and the forms
of its integrations. Compare, for example, the following two statements, which follow closely upon each
other in a single essay: "[Modern colonial and plantation economies] have arisen from the world capitalist
mode of production and have, from the beginning and virtually by definition, functioned within a world
market. But they have simultaneously rested on slave or other dependent labor systems that have deprived
them of the best social and ideological as well as economic advantages of a market in labor-power, in
contradistinction to that market in labor itself which slavery's capitalization of labor made possible." And:
"The colonial expansion of capitalism not only absorbed precapitalist economic systems; it created them.
The enserfment of the Russian peasants during and after the sixteenth century, the second serfdom in
eastern Europe, the economic exploitation of the highland Indian communities of Mexico and Peru, and
the rise of plantation-based slave regimes in the American lowlands may, from this point of view, be seen as
varying expressions of colonial capitalist expansion. They represent nothing so much as the power of
NOTES TO PAGE 81

341

commercial capital to adjust unfree labour systems to the rising demand of West European mass markets,
which themselves, however paradoxically, arose on free labor-represented a major advance over quasiseigneurial alternatives, for it permitted greater economic rationalization and a more flexible labor market." "The Slave Economies in Political Perspective," Journal ofAmerican History 66, no. 1 (June 1979):22.
Paradox is hardly an analytical term, certainly not for Marxists, and here it is plainly inaccurate. It is also
difficult to understand how capitalism might "create" precapitalist forms of labor.
49. See Eric Williams, Capitalism and Slavery, Capricorn, New York, 1966, pp. 98-107; and Walter
Rodney, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa, Bogle-L'Ouverture, London, 1972, pp. 92-101.
50. Cox, op. cit., pp. 165-66.
51. Williams, op. cit., p. 52.
52. Philip Curtin, "The Atlantic Slave Trade, 1600-1800,'' in J. F. A. Ajayi and Michael Crowder (eds.),
History of West Africa, Columbia University Press, New York, 1972,1:240.
53. In this respect it is interesting to recall Count Constantin de Volney's impressions after his journey to
Egypt in 1783-85: "But returning to Egypt, the lesson she teaches history contains many reflections for
philosophy. What a subject for meditation, to see the present barbarism and ignorance of the Copts,
descendants of the alliance between the profound genius of the Egyptians and the brilliant mind of the
Greeks! Just think that this race of black men, today our slave and the object of our scorn, is the very race to
which we owe our arts, sciences, and even the use of speech! Just imagine, finally, that it is in the midst of
peoples who call themselves the greatest friends of liberty and humanity that one has approved the most
barbarous slavery and questioned whether black men have the same kind of intelligence as Whites!"
Quoted by Cheikh Anta Diop, The African Origin of Civilization, Lawrence Hill, New York, 1974, pp. 27-28.
54. Hermann Kees, Ancient Egypt, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1961, pp. 52-53> loo-101.
55. Margaret S. Drowser, "Egypt: Archaeology and History," in Encyclopaedia Britannica, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1965, 8:37.
56. Diop, op. cit., p. 110.
57. Frank Snowden, Blacks in Antiquity, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1970, pp. 103-4.
58. Ibid.; and Drowser, op. cit., p. 40; George Thornson, The First Philosophers, Lawrence and Wishart,
London, 1977 (orig. 1955), pp. 191-93.
59. See Snowden, op. cit., pp. 286-87, note 55.
60. "The story of King Sesostris in Europe and of some of his soldiers who settled by the Phasis River has
been related to Herodotus's report of black, woolly-haired Colchians and has been interpreted as evidence
of a classical tradition that there were Ethiopians among the troops of the Egyptian Sesostris:' Snowden,
op. cit., p. 121.
61. Ibid., pp. 104-5.
62. See the extraordinary work of George James, Stolen Legacy, Philosophical Library, New York, 1954
(republished by Julian Richardson, San Francisco, 1976), chapters 1-111. Since James's work is sometimes
difficult to obtain, the reader is advised that the sources (beyond primary works) James normally relies on
are Henri Frankfort's The Ancient Egyptian Religion, Harper, New York, 1961, and Eva Sandford's The
Mediterranean World in Ancient Times (publisher unlisted). Yosef ben-Jochannan has in turn relied on
James for the treatment of this era in his own work, for example, Africa: Mother of Civilization, Alkebu-Lan,
New York, 1971, pp. 375-440. See also Diop, op. cit., p. 45. One may also consult Eduard Zeller, Outlines of
the History of Greek Philosophy, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1948, pp. 8, 23, 26-93; Theodor
Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, John Murray, London, 1906, i:5-16~43; Margaret Murray, The Splendour That
Was Egypt, Sidgwick and Jackson, London, 1964 (orig. 1949); Henry Olela, 1979, and Lanciany Keita, 1979.
63. "Greek traditions place the installation of Egyptian colonies in Greece at approximately [the middle
of the second millennium, B.c.]: Cecrops settled in Attica; Danaus, brother of Aegyptus, in Argolis; he
taught the Greeks agriculture as well as metallurgy (iron)." Diop, op. cit., p. no. See also Plato's Timaeus for
the suggestion that Greek and African relations were already merely vague memories by the fourth century
B.C. George James notes: "One of the military policies adopted by the Greek military authorities at
Alexandria was the issue of commands to the leading Egyptian Priests for information concerning the
Egyptian history, philosophy and religion. . . . Accordingly, we are told that Ptolemy I Soter, in order to
elicit the secrets of Egyptian wisdom or mystery system, ordered Manetho, the High Priest of the temple of
Isis at Sebennytus in Lower Egypt, to write the philosophy, and the history of the religion of the Egyptians.
Accordingly, Manetho published several volumes concerning these respective fields, and Ptolemy issued an
order prohibiting the translation of these books which had to be kept on reserve in the Library, for
instruction of the Greeks by the Egyptian Priests." lames, op. cit., pp. 49-50. Drowser informs us: "The
priest Manetho had perhaps better sources [than Herodotus] when he wrote his Aegyptiaca about 240 B.c.;
the surviving extracts from this work, ill-copied by later classical writers who quoted it for their own
polemic ends, show how valuable a work has been lost. As it is, Manetho's list of the 30 dynasties of kmgs of
pharaonic Egypt, in spite of the garbled forms of the names and miscopying of figures, has triumphantly
survived the test of archaeology and is still retained by Egyptologists as the basis of the reconstructed
history of Egypt." Drowser, op. cit., p. 31. Recall, Manetho was writing 200 years after Herodotus!
342

NOTES TO PAGES 8 1 - 8 4

64. A. E. Taylor has disputed the historical character of Timaeus, but his interpretation of this section of
the dialogue transforms it into purposeless nonsense; see A. E. Taylor, Plato, The Man and His Work, World
Publishing, Cleveland, 1966, pp. 438-40, and Margaret Murray, op. cit., p. 53.
65. Drowser, op. cit., p. 31.
66. Diop, op. cit., p. 150.
67. Snowden, op. cit., p. log. See also Snowden, ibid., pp. 289-90; and Diop, op. cit., pp. 85-98; and
Boyce Rensberger, "Nubian Monarchy Called Oldest," New York Times, 1 March 1979, pp. A1 and A16,
which begins: "Evidence of the oldest recognizable monarchy in human history, preceding the rise of the
earliest Egyptian kings by several generations, has been discovered in artifacts from ancient Nubia in
Africa. . . . The new findings suggest that the ancient Nubians may have reached this stage of political
development as long ago as 3300 B.c., several generations before the earliest documented Egyptian kin."
For the predominant view-one which presumed the relationship was the reverse, see Charles C. Seligman,
Egypt and Negro Africa, Routledge and Sons, London, 1933.
68. See Kees, op. cit., pp. 334-35.
69. See Snowden, op. cit., pp. 112,126;and Keith Irvine, TheRise of the Colored Races, W. W. Norton, New
York, 1970, pp. 16-17.
70. "The most convincing explanation of Negroid stone figures found in Cyprus is that the sculptures
were portraits of Ethiopians in the civil and military service of the Egyptians during Egyptian occupation of
the island under Arnasis (568-525 B.c.). The sculptures in question were discovered in Ayla Irini and, according to E. Gjerstad, on the basis of style cannot be dated later than 560 B.c." Snowden, op. cit. pp. 122-23.
71. Ibid., pp. 131-32.
72. Ibid., pp. 136-41.
73. Ibid., pp. 141-42.
74. Ibid., p. 183.
75. Irvine, op. cit., pp. 22-23. "In Western Europe, where the majority of the population lived in villages
and hamlets and were preoccupied with the problems of survival. . . . In a world in which lived giants such
as Gog and Magog, headless men with eyes in their stomachs, and the troglodytes of Libya-single-footed
cave-dwellers who shielded themselves from the heat of the sun by lying on their backs and using their
huge feet as umbrellas-the fact that some variations of skin color were also reported among foreigners
must have appeared as a minor detail." Ibid.
76. See Walter Ullmann, The Growth of Papal Government in the Middle Ages, Methuen, London, 1965,p.
88.
77. Sheldon Wolin, The Politics of Vision, Little, Brown, Boston, 1960, p. 105.
78. Contemplating the significance for Western Europe of the sixteenth century, Herbert Butterfield
wrote: "Until a period not long before the Renaissance, the intellectual leadership of such civilizations as
existed in this quarter of the globe had remained with the lands in the eastern half of the Mediterranean or
in empires that stretched farther still into what we call the Middle East. While our Anglo-Saxon forefathers
were semi-barbarian, Constantinople and Baghdad were fabulously wealthy cities, contemptuous of the
backwardness of the Christian West." He went on to write that: "For two thousand years the general
appearance of the world and the activities of men had varied astonishingly little [for Western Europeanslthe sky-line for ever the same-so much so that men were not conscious of either progress or process in
history, save as one city or state might rise by effort or good fortune while another fell. . . . Now [in the
seventeenth century], however, change became so quick as to be perceptible with the naked eye, and the
face of the earth and the activities of men were to alter more in a century than they had previously done in a
thousand years." The Origins of Modern Science, Free Press, New York, 1957, pp. 187-88, 199. For seventeenth century, especially in England, see Marie Boas Hall, "Scientific Thought," in Allardyce Nicoll (ed.),
Shakespeare in His Own Age, Shakespeare Surveyi7, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1964, pp. 13851. Even international diplomacy was marked by medieval conceptions, see Franklin L. Baumer, "England,
the Turk, and the Common Corps of Christendom," American Historical Review 50, no. 1 (October 1944):
26-48. William Carroll Bark, while reluctant to accept the more somber hues of the "Dark Age," admits
that a significant "deflect[ion] from science-philosophy to theology-philosophy" took place during the
Patristic Age and the following feudal period. See his The Origins of the Medieval World, Stanford University Press, Stanford, 1958, p. 72. See also Reginald Poole, Illustrations of the History ofMedieva1 Thought and
Learning, Dover, New York, 1960, pp. 198-245; and the excellent study by Frances A. Yates, The Occult
Philosophy in the Elizabethan Age, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1979.
79. Norman Cantor (ed.), The Medieval World, 300-1300, Macmillan Company, New York, 1963, p. 111.
See also Hugh Trevor-Roper, "The Rise of Christian Europe: The Dark Ages," The Listener, 12 December
1963, pp. 975-79. Trevor-Roper, somewhat dramatically asserts: "[Tjhe old diehards believed that pagan
literature was by definition suspect: at least it could only be made safe by ~ r u d e n excisions:
t
was not an
Israelite forbidden to marry a heathen captive, however desirable, unless he first shaved her head and pared
her nails? (Deut. xxi, 12). "The Rise of Christian Europe: The Medieval Renaissance," The Listener, 26
December 1963, p. 1062.
NOTES TO PAGES 8 4 - 8 7

343

80. Ralph Lerner and Muhsin Mahdi (eds.), Medieval Political Philosophy, Free Press of Glencoe, New
York, 1963, p. 13. For the preoccupation with heresy in medieval Europe, see Norman Cohn, The Pursuit of
the Millennium, Oxford University Press, New York, 1970; and Trevor-Roper, "The Medieval Renaissance,"
op. cit., p p 1064-65.
81. Maxime Rodinson, Mohammed, Vintage, New York, 1974, p. 297.
82. Eugene A. Myers, Arabic Thought and the Western World in the Golden Age of Islam, Frederick Ungar
Publishing, New York, 1964, pp. 76-77.
83. Ibid., pp. 132-33. "The discovery that the Arabs, as also the Byzantines, possessed the key to this new
learning, soon set Europe buzzing, and to every point of contact the new 'masters' sent out to bring it in:'
Hugh Trevor-Roper, "The Medieval Renaissance," op. cit., p. 1062.
84. Myers, ibid., p. 96; Trevor-Roper, ibid., pp. 1063-64.
85. Ralph Austen, "The Islamic Slave Trade Out of Africa (Red Sea and Indian Ocean):' in Henry
Gemery and Jan Hogendorn (eds.), Tne Uncommon Market: Quantitative Studies in the Atlantic Slave
Trade, Academic Press, New York, 1979.
86. Daniel Pipes, "Black Soldiers in Early Muslim Armies," The International Journal ofAfrican Historical
Studies 13, no. 1 (1980): 87-94.
87. Michael Tigar and Madeleine Levy, Law and the Rise of Capitalism, Monthly Review Press, New York,
1977, pp. 55, 61; E. R. Chamberlin, Everyday Life in Renaissance Times, Capricorn Books, New York, 1967,
pp. 64-65; Hugh Trevor-Roper, "The Rise of Christian Europe: The Crusades," The Listener, 19 December
1963, p. 1022.
88. See Fernand Braudel, The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age ofPhilip 11, Harper
and Row, New York, 1973, ~743-44.
89. Marc Bloch, French Rural History, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1966, pp. 7-8; Braudel,
The Mediterranean, op. cit., pp. 142-43; Wallerstein, op. cit., pp. 44-45. William McNeill, following on the
work of Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie and H. H. Lamb, concludes that: "In Europe, a 'Little Ice Age' starting
about 1300 climaxed between 1550 and 1850 and has been succeeded by warmer temperatures in the
twentieth century." McNeill, Plagues and People, Anchor Books, Garden City, 1977, p. 297 n. 23. Wallerstein,
referring to the work of Gustaf Utterstrom, makes a similar point: "Utterstrom reminds us that climatic
change might have had special bearing on the earlier periods in the transformation of Europe. 'The
primitive agriculture of the Middle Ages must have been much more dependent on favorable weather than
is modern agriculture with its high technical standards.' " Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 34.
90. Hugh Trevor-Roper has put this most dramatically: "My point is that the Crusades were not just a
religious movement. . . . They were not even, by themselves, the cause of the European break-through.
They were part of a much larger, much wider process: a process which can be seen all over Europe and on
all the frontiers of western Christendom: beyond the Pyrenees, beyond the Elbe, on the Scottish border, in
Ireland. This process is essentially a north European process. It is based on a new population-growth and
new techniques, agricultural, social, military. . . . Perhaps, as Gibbon wrote, the Crusades were a diversion
of this great expansion into the sideline of unprofitable imperialism; perhaps the imperialism was inseparable from the expansion." The Rise of Christian Europe, Harcourt, Brace and World, New York, 1965,
pp. 127-28.
91. "Merchants regularly paid fines for breaking every law that concerned their business, and went on as
before. The wealth of Venice and Genoa was made in trade with the infidels of Syria and Egypt despite
papal prohibition. Prior to the 14th century, it has been said, men 'could hardly imagine the merchant's
strongbox without picturing the devil squatting on the lid.' Whether the merchant too saw the devil as he
counted coins, whether he lived with a sense of guilt, is hard to assess." Barbara Tuchman, A DistantMirror,
Ballentine Books, New York, 1977, p. 38. See also Iris Origo, The Merchant ofPrato, Alfred Knopf, New York,
1957, pp. 80,123; Tigar and Levy, op. cit., pp. 74-75.
92. "In the early centuries central and eastern Europe was a fruitful source and the trade in these socalled 'Slavs' (Saqaliba) was in the hands of Christians and Jews until they were sold into the hands of
Muslim merchants on the shores of the Mediterranean or the Caspian Sea. From the eleventh century,
when more powerful polities began to emerge in Europe, this source began to dry up, but slaves of
European origin were still obtained by raiding and piracy within the Mediterranean and along the Atlantic
Coast. European Christian powers of the area had no scruples about paying the Muslims back in their own
coin. Another major source of slaves was Central Asia, the home of diverse nomadic tribes speaking Turkic
languages." J. 0 . Hunwick, "Black Africans in the Islamic World: An Understudied Dimension of the Black
Diaspora:' Tarikh 5, no. 4 (1978): 23. For the intra-European trade in slaves, see Iris Origo: "[Ilt was the
labour shortage after the Black Death of 1348 that suddenly caused a demand for domestic slaves to revive,
and brought them to Italy not only from Spain and Africa, but from the Balkans, Constantinople, Cyprus
and Crete, and, above all, from the shores of the Black Sea. . . . Many of them mere children of nine or ten,
they belonged to a great variety of different races: yellow-skinned, slanting-eyed Tartars, handsome fair
Circassians, Greeks, Russians, Georgians, Alans, and Lesghians. Sold by their parents for a crust of bread,
or kidnapped by Tartar raiders and Italian sailors, they were brought from the slave-markets of Tana and
344

NOTES TO PAGES 8 7 - 8 9

Caffa, of Constantinople, Cyprus, and Crete to the Venetian and Genoese quays, where they were bought
by dealers and forwarded to customers inland." Origo, The Merchant ofPrato, op. cit., p. 90. For Pope John
XXII, see ibid., p. 8.
93. Wallerstein, op. cit., pp. 21-24. Tuchman prefers to reconcile demographic, climatic, technological,
and sociopolitical bases for the crisis, op. cit., pp. 24-48.
94. Trevor-Roper, Rise of Christian Europe, op. cit., p. 177.
95. Jean Richard, "The Mongols and the Franks," Journal of Asian History 3, no. 1 (1969): 45. Peter
Forbath tells us a bit more of the story: "In 1221, with the Fifth Crusade shattered in the defeat at Cairo,
Jacques of Vitry, the Bishop of Acre last of the Crusader states to survive, wrote to Pope Honorius 111that 'A
new and mighty protector of Christianity has arisen. He is King David of India, who has taken the field of
battle against the unbelievers at the head of an army of unparalleled size.' This King David, who according
to Bishop Jacques was commonly called Prester John, was believed to be the son or grandson of the Prester
John who had been awaited at the time of the Second Crusade. . . . This king, it was to turn out, was
Genghis Khan." Forbath, The River Congo, D. P. Dutton, New York, 1979, p. 28.
96. Jean Richard, ibid., p. 48.
97. See R. S. Lopez, H. A. Miskimin, and Abraham Udovitch, "England to Egypt, ~50-1500: Long-term
Trends and Long-distance Trade," in M. A. Cook (ed.), Studies in the Economic History of the Middle East
from the Rise ofIslam to the Present Day, Oxford University Press, London, 1970, as cited by Wallerstein, op.
cit., p. 40 n. 85.
98. William McNeill, op. cit., pp. ~ 3 - 3 4 .
99. Ibid., chap. 4; Tuchman, op. cit., pp. 92-102.
loo. Trevor-Roper, Rise of Christian Europe, op. cit., pp. 119-20.
101. Americo Castro, The Structure of Spanish History, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1954, p.
670. For more detail of the English role-based on the Contemporary Accounts of an Englishman and Two
Germans (ibid.1-see Violet Shillington, "The Beginnings of the Anglo-Portuguese Alliance," Translations
of the Royal Historical Society 20 (1906): 109-32; and Edgar Prestage, "The Anglo-Portuguese Alliance,"
ibid., 4th ser., vol. 17 (1934): 69-100.
102. Wallerstein, op. cit., pp. qgff.
103. See Charles Verlinden, "The Italian Colony of Lisbon and the Development of Portuguese Metropolitan and Colonial Economy," in Verlinden's collection of essays, The Beginnings ofModern Colonization,
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1970, pp. 98-112. A glimpse of the importance of Italian traders in
European and Mediterranean trade and the structures of their commercial houses and banks can be found
in Origo's detailed study of Datini (The Merchant of Prato, op. cit.), pp. 70-73.
104. See Verlinden, "Some Aspects of Slavery in Medieval Italian Colonies," ibid., pp. 79-97.
105. Castro, op. cit., p. 668.
106. See C. R. Boxer, Four Centuries of Portuguese Expansion, 1415-1825, Witwatersrand University Press,
Johannesburg, 1965, p. 6 (as cited by Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 50 n. 133).
107. See Harold V. Livermore, "Portugal," in Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1965,18:276-77; and C. Raymond
Beazley, "Prince Henry of Portugal and His Political, Commercial and Colonizing Work," American
Historical Review 17, no. 2 (January 1923): 253-54. Also of interest is A. J. R. Russell-Wood, Fidalgos and
Philanthropists, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1968, pp. 6-7.
108. Castro, op. cit., pp. 668-69. Castro here also takes time to acknowledge his differences with
Portuguese scholars: "It is obvious . . .that the militant impetus and support for . . . Peninsular vivisection
could not arise spontaneously. . . . The initial motivation of that rebellion does not lie in the protoPortuguese character of that country. . . . That is why two apparently contradictory ways of understanding
the origin of Portugal-my own and that of Portuguese historians who opposed it-can both be true."
Ibid., p. 669.
109. See Livermore, op. cit., pp. 275-76.
110. Francis M. Rogers, "The Attraction of the East and Early Portuguese Discoveries," Luso-Brazilian
Review I, no. 1 (June 1964): 46. Rogers goes on to remind us of the rich utopianism contained in the letter
presumably written by Prester John in 1165 and its great popular acceptance for the next 300 years or so.
The letter whatever its origins (some scholars have argued that it was written by or on the authority of
Frederick Barbarossa; others that its author was an anonymous Levantine Christian monk) described the
realm of Prester John in terms that put contemporary Europe to shame, in material as well as social terms.
The letter was consequently a critique of Europe, its decay, its chaos, its corruption, and its moral
dissolution. See also Vsevolod Slessarev, Prester John: Tne Letter and the Legend, University of Minnesota
Press, Minneapolis, 1959; and Robert Silverberg, The Realm of Prester John, Doubleday, Garden City, 1972,
PP. 40-73,
111. Robert Silverberg, op. cit., p. 194.
in. That the Prince was a man of unusual personality can be surmised from the following lines extracted
from his contemporary and court chronicler, Gomes Eannes de Azurara: "Neither luxury nor avarice ever
found a home within his breast, for as to the former he was so temperate that all his life was passed in
NOTES TO PAGES 9 0 - 9 3

345

purest chastity and as a virgin the earth received him at his death again to herself: . .. It would be hard to tell
how many nights he passed in which his eyes knew no sleep; and his body was so transformed by the use of
abstinence that it seemed as if Don Henry had made its nature to be different from that of other men. . . .
The Infant drank wine only for a very small part of his life, and that in his youth, but afterwards he
abstained entirely from it. . . . Well-nigh one-half of the year he spent in fasting, and the hands of the poor
never went away empty from his presence." G. E. de Azurara, The Chronicle of the Discovery and Conquest of
Guinea, C. R. Beazley and E. Prestage (eds.), Burt Franklin and E. Prestage (eds.), Burt Franklin Publisher,
New York, 1896, vol. I, chap. 4, pp. 12-15.
10. Francis Rogers, op. cit., p. 50.
114. Gomes Eannes de Azurara, op. cit., chap. 7, pp. 27-30.
115. Robert Silverberg, op. cit., p. 197.
116. Ibid., pp. 200-205. Covilha (Covilhao) was sent by King Joao I1 (1495-1521) in 1487 on a mission to
"discover and learn about Prester John." Covilha and his companion, Alfonso de Paiva, traveled by way of
Barcelona, Naples, Rhodes, Alexandria, and Cairo. From there they trekked to Tor, Suakin, and Aden with
caravans of Muslims. At Aden they parted, Covilha pushing on east to Calicut, Goa and Ormuz Paiva
reportedly to Ethiopia. Upon his return to Cairo, Covilha learned of Paiva's death (either in Cairo or
Ethiopia, the reports vary). Disguising himself as a Muslim Covilha proceeded first to Jedda, Mecca, and
Medina, and finally reached Abyssinia sometime in 1490 or thereabouts. Thirty years later, in 1590, he
related his mission to Rodrigo de Lima and Francisco Alvarez. He remained in Abyssinia upon their
departure, still the honored guest of his host, "Presser John." See also Francisco Alvares, Narrative of the
Portuguese Embassy to Abyssinia during the Years 1520-1527, Lord Stanley of Alderley (ed.), Burt Franklin
Publisher, New York, 1970, and Boxer, op. cit., p. 12.
117. J. 0 . Hunwick, op. cit., p. 22. William McKee Evans has made the unique claim that: "In view of the
broad-minded ethnic and social attitudes of the Prophet as well as the noblest of his followers, it is ironic
that the lands of Islam became the cradle of modern racial stratification and of many of the ideas that are
still used to justify special privileges defined by skin color and other racial characteristics. Muslims aspired
to a universal brotherhood of believers. But prominent among their actual achievements was the forging of
new links between blackness and debasement. It was under the Muslims that slavery became largely a racial
institution." ("From the Land of Canaan to the Land of Guinea: The Strange Odyssey of the 'Sons of
Ham,' " American Historical Review 85, no. 1 [February 19801: 28.) The logic of Evans's argument rests on
several assumptions: 1. "[Tlhe rise of Islam eliminated from the Mediterranean slave trade an important
source of light-skinned slaves. . . [because] . . . Islamic law. . . held that no freeborn Muslim could be sold
into slavery" (ibid.); 2. "During the later Middle Ages a number of European states developed, with
sophisticated military organizations that could answer the challenge of Islam blow for blow. . . . few
European slaves were available for purchase during the later Middle Ages because of the more orderly
political conditions in France, England, the German Empire, and other countries . . . the supply from
Europe was reduced to a minimum, and those came mainly from the Slavic lands." (ibid., pp. 28-29); and
3. "[Mjost black Africans lived in ethnically fragmented, often mutually antagonistic, societies that could
offer little resistance to raids from the Sudanese or other Muslim states." (ibid., p. 29). Ultimately, Evans
argues, racial myths emerge to justify and rationalize existing power relationships. Just how the myths of
racial stratification made their way into Christian European cosmology is not made very clear in Evans'
account. The single instance cited by Evans comes from Azurara's recounting of a "noble Moor" successfully bargaining for his own release from his Christian captors in exchange for ten "black Moors." The
justification for the exchange, however, is not that of the Moor-whatever it might have been-but of
Azurara who referred to the Judeo Christian myth of Noah's sons (Azurara mistakenly identified Ham, the
"father of Canaan," as Cain). Nevertheless, Evans is certain that: "As historical events redirected the slave
trade, as European slavery entered what the leading authority [Charles Verlinden] on medieval slavery has
called its 'Negro' period, Christians began to look at blacks in ways that had been characteristic of racially
stratified Muslim countries for some seven centuries" (ibid., pp. 38-39).
Evans acknowledges that his "chief authority on Muslim race relations and racial altitudes" is Gernot
Rotter's unpublished dissertation "Die Stellung des Negers in der islamisch-arabischen Geselschaft bis XVI
Jahrhundert," 1967. Other important sources are Bernard Lewis, Race and Color in Islam, Harper and Row,
New York, 1970; and Adam Mez, The Renaissance of Islam, Luzac and Co., London, 1937. Rotter's unpublished work made its initial appearance with equal significance in Bernard Lewis's work. See Race and
Color, p. 2 n. 1. For a treatment of the ideological currents within which Lewis swims, see Edward Said,
Orientalism, Pantheon, New York, 1978, pp. 315-21; and Maxine Rodinson, "The Western Image and
Western Studies of Islam," in Joseph Schacht and C. E. Bosworth (eds.), The Legacy of Islam, Oxford
University Press, London, 1974, p p 9-62. Evans's use of his sources is, however, sometimes quite curious.
For instance, he uses Iris Origo's work as one confirmation for his contention that Christian Europe and its
rulers denied Christian slaves to the Muslim trade. On precisely the same page cited by Evans, Origo says
something quite different: "Nevertheless, it is quite plain that many of the Genoese and Venetian traders in
the Black Sea paid little heed as to whether the human wares they carried had, or had not, been sanctified
346

NOTES T O PAGES 9 4 - 9 5

by baptism. The deeds of sale in Caffa and Pera in 1289 show that many of the slaves who were sold there
belonged to peoples professing either the Catholic or Orthodox faith, since they included Circassians,
Greeks, Russians, Georgians, Alans, and Lesghians . . . this did not prevent their sale" ("The Domestic
Enemy," op. cit., p. 328). Evans's citing of Mez is equally cavalier. He uses Mez to confirm: "That slaves were
predominantly black in Egypt during the period ca. 950-1250" (Evans, op. cit., p. 26 n. 28); that Islamic
racial stratification led to untrained white slaves being valued as high as 1,000 diners, while Black slaves
"fetched no more than 25-30 diners" (ibid., p. 29 and n. 41); and that one expression of Muslim contempt
for Blacks was the belief that "blacks were 'fickle and careless. Dancing and beating time are engrained in
their nature. They say: were the negro to fall from heaven to the earth he would beat time falling' " (ibid., p.
32). What Mez actually wrote is interesting in comparison. Of slaves in Egypt, Mez wrote: "In the 4thIioth
century, Egypt, South Arabia, and North Africa, were the chief markets for black slaves" (my emphasis).
Mez, op. cit., p. 157. Of slave prices, Mez commented: "Like the negro-servant today the black house-slave
was chiefly employed as door-keeper. In a society which, above everything else, valued good poetry and
fine music, artistically talented and trained boys and girls would inevitably be in great demand . . . and for
such girls so trained the price was from lo to zo,ooo marks. . . . As with us, famous singers and female
artists had their fancy prices. About 300/912 a female singer was sold in an aristocratic circle for 13,000
diners (130,000 marks), the broker making 1,000 diners" (ibid., pp. 157-58). Mez also put a slightly
different interpretation on Black dancing. Adding his own coloring to the remarks of the Christian
physician Ibn Botlan (ca. early eleventh century) to whom Evans turns for a characterization of Muslim
attitudes toward Blacks and dancing, Mez noted: "The negro must always dance. Like the German when he
has shaken off the work-day mood he feels an unconquerable passion to sing" (ibid., p. 161 n. 2). Evans
appears to be equally slick with historical reconstruction as he is with his scholarly references. Compare his
comment: "Tens of thousands of black Africans, for example, labored on land reclamation projects in Iraq.
Blacks were also used in the copper and salt mines of the Sahara. Wherever the work was demanding and
the conditions harsh, black slaves were likely to be f o u n d (p. 30). J. 0 . Hunwick provides a somewhat
fuller description. "[I]n a limited number of instances African slave labour was used in large-scale agricultural works, as it was also used, on a lesser scale, in mining and industry. The best known and best
documented instance of such 'plantation slavery' is the use made of large numbers of East African slavesZanj-in draining the salt marshes at the mouth of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers around Basra. . . . The
Zanj enter history only in 868 when they began their fifteen-year revolt which shook the foundations of the
'Abbasid caliphate.' " Hunwick continues: "Once the movement gained success it was joined by some of the
Black troops of the caliphal guard sent to fight it, and by some Bedouin and marsh Arabs. . . . The Zanj built
their own capital, al-Mukhtara and another fortified town, al-Mani'a. In 870 they captured the flourishing
seaport of Ubulla and in 871 they sacked Basra with enormous slaughter. . . . It was not until 880 that the
caliph's brother, freed of other pressing military preoccupations, was able to take serious steps against the
Zanj. Even then, it took three years of very hard campaigning to crush the movement and seize its
towns. . . . The major experiment with 'plantation slavery' in the Islamic world had ended in disaster"
(Hunwick, op. cit., pp. 33-34). Hunwick also mentions the enormous variety of occupations of Black slaves
in Islamic society: household slaves, revenue officers, poets, musicians, professional soldiers, eunuchs,
rulers and colonial administrators, scholars, and concubines, to suggest the range. (See also Ralph Austen,
op. cit.)
The final contradiction in Evans's thesis is presented in its entirety in his own words. Sandwiching the
discussion of a number of Islamic rulers who were Black and the racial complaints of a number of
prominent Muslim poets who were also Black, Evans makes the following remarks: "Despite the general
polarization of Muslim society into low-status blacks and high-status whites, no clearly defined color bar
emerged (Evans, op. cit., p. 31). It should also be noted that earlier Evans had written: "In certain contexts,
especially when comparing themselves to more northerly peoples, Arabs of this period thought of themselves as 'black'" (p. 24 n. 23). Still, he insists that the terms "Mamluk" and "Abd came to distinguish
respectively European from other slaves while David Ayalon remarks on the variable use of the term
"Mamluk" in his "Studies on the Structure of the Mamluk Army," pt. 2, Bulletin of the School of Oriental
and African Studies 15 (1953): 466; and his "Studies in Al-Jabarti:' in Studies on the Mamluis in Egypt,
Variorum Press, London, 1977, pp. 316-17. And finally, "Muslim attitudes toward blacks were mixed, but
amid their ambivalence one can detect here and there most of those notions making up that cluster of ideas
were recognized as modern Western racial prejudice" (pp. 31-32). HOWa racially stratified "pigmentocracy" (Evans's terms) manages to avoid the formation of a color bar is not clarified by Evans. In short,
Evans's thesis is analytically flawed, not supported by his own "evidence," and suspiciously convenient at
this moment of renewed Western hostility toward Islamic peoples. Moreover, he never seems to get around
to explaining why or how the ideologues of a society so ideologically hostile to Islamic beliefs and with a
quite ancient and sophisticated racial consciousness of its own would bother or need bother to borrow
such an ambivalently held social ideology.
118. Hunwick, op. cit., p. 28.
119. Norman Daniel has argued: "Of the points that I summarised, most had a long life. The 'fraudulent'
NOTES TO PAGE 95

347

or 'hypocritical' character of Muhammad's claim to prophesy, while he was an ambitious schemer, a bandit
and a lecher; the emphasis on Islam as a falling short of Christianity, a sum of heresy, particularly in
connection with the Trinity; preoccupation with the Qur'anic teaching of Christ; the general lines, if not all
the details, of the most unflattering biography of Muhammad, and particularly the weight given to the
influence of Sergius and other guides upon him; the enormous Importance given to two moral questions,
the public reliance on force and the supposed private laxity in sexual matters; the ridicule and contempt of
the Qur'anic Paradise; the suspicion of determinist and predestinarian ethics; the interest in Islamic
religious practices, the admission of some Islamic practice as a good example, but the treatment of the cult
in general in vain; all these, with some differences in emphasis, but with great continuity in the attitude of
intellectual contempt, long dominated Christian and European thought." Islam and the West, Edinburgh
University Press, Edinburgh, 1960, p. 276. (See also pp. 144-46.)
120. Norman Daniel, The Arabs and Medieval Europe, Longman, London, 1979, p. 115.
121. Ibid., pp. 327-28.
122. Davis, The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture, op. cit., p. 94.
123. "The Philosophy of Aristotle had such an authority in sixteenth and seventeenth century Spain, that
any attack on him 'was regarded as a dangerous heresy,' and the Politics enjoyed a respecto casi supersticioso."
Mavis Campbell, "Aristotle and Black Slavery: A Study in Race Prejudice," Race 15, no. 3 (January 1974):
285-86.
124. Ibid., p. 286.
125. Ibid., pp. 290-91.
126. William Westermann, The Slave Systems of Greek and Roman Antiquity, American Philosophical
Society, Philadelphia, 1955, p. 156.
127. Trevor-Roper, Rise of Christian Europe, op. cit., pp. 88-89.
128. Abbas Hamdani has recalled: " 'The word India in the middle Ages,' says Charles Nowell, 'had no
exact geographical meaning to Europeans; it was a convenient expression denoting the East beyond the
Mohammedan world.' " "Columbus and the Recovery of Jerusalem," Journal of the American Oriental
Society99, no. I (January-March 1979): 39. Later Hamdani observes, "George Kimble in his Geography in
the Middle Ages (London, 1938, 128 n.), observes that the term 'Indies' is 'a vague term, for in the Middle
Ages there were at least three Indias, viz., India Minor, India Major and India Tertia, i.e. Sind, Hind and
Zinj of the Arabs. The first two were located in Asia, the last in Africa (Ethiopia).' " Ibid., p. 46 n. 11.
129. G. K. Hunter, "Elizabethans and Foreigners," in Awardyce Nicoll (ed.), Shakespeare in His Own Age,
Shakespeare Survey 17, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1964, p. 40.

Chapter Five
1. Alan Manchester, British Preeminence in Brazil: Its Rise and Decline, Octagon Books, New York, 1964,
p 1.
2. Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World-System, Academic Press, New York, 1974, p. 42; see also
Boxer, Four Centuries, op. cit., p. 9.
3. Wallerstein, ibid., p. 47.
4. "According to the chroniclers, the idea of carrying on the Reconquest in North Africa was suggested by
the need to find useful employment for those who had lived on frontier raids for almost a quarter of a
century, and by the desire of John's sons to be armed knights in a real conflict such as the older generation
had known." H. V. Livermore, "Portuguese History," in H. V. Livermore (ed.), Portugal and Brazil, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1963, p. 59. Partially cited in Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 46.
5. See pp. n8ff, chapter 4; and especially Francis Rogers op. cit., pp. 54ff.
6. Livermore states: "With the passing of the old dynasty some of the older nobility had clung to Castile
and disappeared from Portugal. Their places had been taken by a new nobility formed of John of Avis's
supporters, almost all new men, recently enriched, ambitious, and loyal." Livermore, "Portuguese History,"
op. cit., p. 60. Wallerstein provides an interesting characterization of the Portuguese bourgeoisie: "The
interests of the bourgeoisie for once did not conflict with those of the nobility. Prepared for modern
capitalism by a long apprenticeship in long-distance trading and by the experience of living in one of
the most highly monetized areas of Europe (because of the economic involvement with the Islamic Mediterranean world), the bourgeoisie too sought to escape the confines of the small Portuguese market."
Wallerstein, op. cit., pp. 51-52. His interpretation of the relationship between this bourgeoisie and its
Genoese colleagues differs from mine (see text below) and is uncharacteristically lacking in cited scholastic
authority.
7. M. Postan, "The Fifteenth Century," Economic History Review 9, no. 2 (May 1939):165. In this short
essay, Postan recounts the deterioration of English domestic production-agricultural as well as manufacturing-and foreign trade in the fifteenth century.
8. Livermore, "Portuguese History," op. cit., pp. 58-59. Livermore is most likely referring to the Treaty of
Windsor not Westminster. See Manchester, op. cit., p. 2, see also Carus Wilson, "The Overseas Trade of
348

NOTES T O PAGES 9 6 - 102

Bristol," in Eileen Power and M. M. Postan (eds.), Studies in English Trade in the Fifteenth Century,
Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1951, p. 220.
9. Carus Wilson, op. cit., p. 220. Alan Manchester notes that in the seventeenth century "British
merchants in Lisbon [submitted] . . . a complaint against the non-execution of privileges justly theirs, with
certain papers showing the nature of these privileges. Arranged chronologically, these documents were: a
charter dated August lo, 1400, by which D. Joao I conceded to the English the same privileges as had been
conceded to the Genoese; a charter dated October 29,1450, by which D. Affonso V conceded to the English
the right to a special judge in all commercial cases which should arise between them and the Portuguese; a
charter dated March 28,1451, by Affonso V, granting the right to Englishmen to live and move about at will
within the Portuguese kingdom; and the letter patent, dated February 7,1495, by which D. Manuel granted
special privileges to merchants from certain German cities." Manchester, op. cit., p. 5. Unlike Manchester,
Wilson makes no attempt to reconcile the fact of this linkage between the two "states" with his predilection
for the nation as a unit of historical analysis. This serves him badly when, in a few pages on (ibid., pp. 22224), he must deal with piracy between the "Portuguese and English." It should have occurred to him that he
was dealing with different entrepreneurial factions, some quite reconciled to mutual collahorations and
shared interests, others, unaffected by treaties of alliance and still quite comfortably mutually antagonistic
and piratically competitive.
lo. Charles Verlinden, "Italian Influence in Iberian Colonization," Hispanic American Historical Review
33, no. 2 (May 1953): 199; and Wallerstein, op. cit., pp. qgff.
11. Virginia Rau, "A Family of ltalian Merchants in Portugal in the XVth Century: The Lomellini," in
Studi in Onore di Armando Sapori, Instituto Editoriale Cisalpino, Milano, 1957, ~717.
12. Verlinden comments: "After the appearance of Florentines in the Portuguese records in 1338. . . only
Milanese, Piacentines, and Lombards are mentioned, and more often Genoese. But one must not think
that the Venetians did not play an active role in Portugal. . . . Nevertheless, the position of the Genoese and
Piacentine merchants seems to have been more important, especially in Lishon itself." Verlinden, "The
Italian Colony of Lisbon and the Development of Portuguese Metropolitan and Colonial Economy:' in
Verlinden, The Beginnings ofModern Colonization, op. cit., p. 101.
13. About the Pezagno (Pessagno) family, Verlinden writes: "The merchant Salveto Pessagno, a member
of a Genoese family which played a large part in Atlantic trade-particularly with England-and which
provided Portugal with a series of admirals from 1317 on, died in Famagusta toward the end of the century."
Verlinden, "Some Aspects of Slavery in Medieval Italian Colonies," op. cit., p. 89; see also Verlinden, "The
Italian Colony of Lisbon," ibid., pp. 98-99 n. 3.
14. Rau, op. cit., p. 718
15. See H. V. Livermore, "Portuguese History," op. cit., pp. 60-61; Rau, op. cit., passim; and Verlinden,
"The Italian Colony of Lisbon," op. cit., p. 110.
16. Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 52.
17. See Verlinden, "The most frequently mentioned of the Italian merchants in Portugal is Bartolomeo
Marchionni. The one who appeared in 1511among the outfitters of the ship "Bretoa" is another Bartolomeo
Marchionni, presumably a relative of the man encountered around 1443 in connection with the coral
agreement. No doubt it was the second of these namesakes who was given the task of supplying Pero da
Covilhao and Afonso de Paiva with money during the course of their voyage in search of India and Prester
John. "The Italian Colony in Lisbon," op. cit., p. 107.
18. Verlinden, "Italian influence in Iberian Colonization," op. cit., pp. 202-3.
19. Verlinden, "Navigateurs, marchands et colons italiens au service de la decouverte et de la colonisation
portugaise sous Henri le Navigateur," Le Moyen Age 64, no. 4 (1958): 468-70.
20. See Montague Guiseppi, "Alien Merchants in England in the Fifteenth Century," Transactions of the
Royal Historical Society, new ser., vol. 9 (1895): 88-90; W. I. Haward, The Financial Transactions between
the Lancastrian Government and the Merchants of the Staple from 1449 to 1461," in Eileen Power and M.
M. Postan, op. cit., p. 315; and Martin Holmes, "Evil May-Day, 1517," History Today 15, no. 9 (September
1965): 642-43.
21. Guiseppi, op. cit., p. 94.
22. Thrupp, "The Grocers of London, A Study of Distributive Trade," in Eileen Power and M. M. Postan,
op. cit., pp. 250,290.
23. Rau, op. cit., p. 723; Carus Wilson, op. cit., p. 221; and Verlinden, "The Italian Colony of Lisbon," op.
cit., pp. 104-5.
24. Carus Wilson, op. cit., p. 225; see also Guiseppi, op. cit., pp. 90, 93; and Verlinden, "The Italian
Colony of Lisbon:' op. cit., p. 111.
25. Boxer, Four Centuries of Portuguese Expansion, op. cit., p. 14.
26. C. A. Curwen records: "In the third year of [Yung Lo's] reign (1405) began that remarkable series of
seven maritime expeditions which rank among the great feats of seamanship of all time. They were
commanded by a Chinese Muslim, a court eunuch called Cheng Ho. On the first voyage his fleet consisted
of sixty-three ships, constructed with watertight compartments, the largest of which are said to have been
NOTES TO PAGES 1 0 3 - 5

349

over 400 feet long and 180 feet wide, with four decks. The total complement was 27,560, including troops,
officials, and officers, and 180 doctors. This expedition reached India. In subsequent voyages Cheng Ho's
ships visited more than thirty countries in the Indian Ocean and archipelago, the Persian Gulf, Aden, and
the east coast of Africa." Curwen, "China," in Douglas Johnson (ed.), The Making of the Modern World:
Europe Discovers the World, Barnes and Noble, New York, 1971,1:341-42. See also Wallerstein's discussion of
the Chinese empire's long-distance trade in Wallerstein, op. cit., pp. 52ff.
27. William Appleman Williams, "Empire as a Way of Life," The Nation, 2-9 August 1980, p. 104.
28. It is interesting to contrast Williams's use of the Chinese example with Wallerstein's defense of what
he terms "materialist arguments." Williams writes: "The Chinese came, they traded, they observed. They
made no effort to create an empire or even an imperial sphere of influence. Upon returning home, their
reports engendered a major debate. The decision was made to burn and otherwise destroy the great
fleets. . . . The point is not to present the Chinese as immaculately disinterested, or whiter than white. It is
simply to note that we now know that the capacity for empire does not lead irresistibly or inevitably to the
reality of empire." Williams, op. cit., p. 104. Wallerstein, on the other hand, appears utterly convinced that
the voluntaristic explanation is both sufficient and too indeterminate. His argument seems to be that the
Chinese imperial structure acted as a political, technological, and ideological constraint on the development of a bourgeoisie-prematurely developed? he wonders aloud-identified with the further development of capitalism in China and colonial expansion. He concludes: "So China, if anything seemingly better
placed prima facie to move forward to capitalism in terms of already having an extensive state bureaucracy,
being further advanced in terms of the monetization of the economy and possibly of technology as well,
was nonetheless less well placed after all. It was burdened by an imperial political structure. It was
burdened by the 'rationality' of its value system which denied the state the leverage for change (had it
wished to use it) that European monarchs found in the mysticality of European feudal loyalties." Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 63.
29. Boxer recounts that: "After rounding the Cape of Good Hope, and calling at various Arab-Swahili
ports along the east coast of Africa, da Gama reached Malmdi, where he received the help of Ahmad-IbnMadjid, the most famous Arab pilot of his age, and one who knew the Indian Ocean better than any other
man living. Thanks to his guidance, the Portuguese were enabled to reach Calicut, the major emporium of
the pepper trade. . . . Not unnaturally, Ibn Madjid's memory is still execrated by the majority of his fellow
countrymen and co-religionists; and he himself bitterly bewailed in his old age what he had done." Boxer,
op. cit., pp. 13-14.
30. Of the sixteenth century, Fernand Braudel has written: "The commercial activity of the sea, concentrating more and more in the West, tipped the balance, spelling the inexorable decline of the eastern
basin which had for so long been the source of wealth. The shift brought little joy to Milan, but brought
Genoa and Florence to prominence. Genoa for her share, and a lion's share it was, acquired the Spanish
and American trade.. . . In the second half of the century, Genoa took the lead. . . . Foreign catchment was
the most important, and it was by this means that Florence and Genoa gained control of all the economically backward regions, whether in Eastern Europe or southern Italy, in the Balkans, France, or the Iberian
peninsula." Braudel, The Mediterranean, op. cit., ~ 3 9 3 .
31. One should be aware, as Robert Knecht reminds us that in "the Indies . . . the superiority of the
Europeans was confined to the sea." Knecht, "The Discoveries:' in Douglas Johnson, op. cit., p. 27.
32. John William Blake in his documentary history of Europeans in West Africa, 1450-1460, ~ 0 1 . 1(Kraus,
Nendeln, 1967), asserts that the records he has gathered "show that between 1453 and 1480 Andalusian
seamen and traders sent many ships to the West African coast, and that the government of Castile claimed
exclusive possession of Guinea" (p. 186, see also p. 189).
33. Ibid., p. 191; see also Edgar Prestage, "Vasco da Gama and the Way to the Indies," in Arthur Percival
Newton (ed.), the Great Age of Discovery, University of London, London, 1932, p. 49.
34. Hans Koning, Columbus: His Enterprise, Monthly Review Press, New York, 1976, pp. 13-14.
35. Arthur P. Newton, "Christopher Columbus and his First Voyage:' in Newton (ed.), op. cit., pp. 76ff.
36. See Newton, op. cit., p. 77; and Koning, op. cit., p. 22.
37. Newton, op. cit., p. 78.
38. Koning believes that Felipa's family was of Italian origins, op. cit., p. 25. On the other hand, Newton's
reconstruction of her family's history makes it very dear that her genealogy contained Italian elements as
well as Portuguese lesser nobility, op. cit., p. 79.
39. Arthur Davies, "Origins of Colombian Cosmography," in Studi Colornbiana, Stabilimento Arti
Grafiche ed Affini, Genova, 1952, ~59-62.
40. Ibid., p. 61.
41. Ibid., p. 62. Martin Behain (or Behaim) is described by Verlinden as a German knight, who, at least by
1486, was living on Fayal in the Azores. At this later time he is supposed to have been enlisted by the
Portuguese court in an ill-fated attempt to cross the Atlantic (see text below). Behain, as it turned out,
missed the boat. See Verlinden, "A Precursor of Columbus: The Fleming Ferdinand van Olmen (1487):' in
Verlinden, The Beginnings ofModern Colonization, op. cit., pp. 190-91; also see Newton, op. cit., pp. 90-91.
350

NOTES TO PAGES 106-7

42. Arthur Davies, op. cit., p. 63.
43. Verlinden, "A Precursor," op. cit., p. 189.
44. See Arthur Davies, op. cit., pp. 62-64; and Knecht, op. cit., pp. 29-30.
45. Verlinden,"A Precursor," op. cit., p. 194.
46. Ibid., p. 193.
47. Ibid.
48. Hans Koning, op. cit., pp. 39-40.
49. The brothers, Martin, Francisco, and Vincente Pinzon, were, according to Las Casas, the dominant
force in Palos de la Frontera (See Newton, op. cit., pp. 87-88). Martin, after a business trip to Rome, which
included a visit to the Papal Court in 1491, had returned to Palos with detailed information on an Atlantic
route that he had gathered from the Papal library. He shared this material with Columbus and helped to
arrange with Pinelli and Santangel for a police fine against Palos to be redirected for support of Columbus's
project. Martin and Vincente sailed with Columbus as captains of the Pinta and Nina. Martin, however,
died during this first voyage. The family subsequently entered into a prolonged legal attempt to secure
from Columbus what they presumed was their share of the wealth he secured from the New World.
50. Charles Verlinden, "Italian Influence on Spanish Economy and Colonization during the Reign of
Ferdinand of Castile," in Verlinden, The Beginnings ofModern Colonization, op. cit., p. 130.
51. Ibid., pp. 114-20. Americo Castro concluded: "The Italians" form of life had more points of contact
with the Jews than with the Spanish Christians. In the Middle Ages there were dynasties of great Genoese
traders . . . ; the Genoese continued to engage in banking negotiations between Spain and her American
dominions when there were no Jews to do this." Castro, op. cit., p. 513 n. 98.
52. Verlinden, "Italian Influence in Iberian Colonization," op. cit., p. 210; Fernand Braudel, The Mediterranean, op. cit., ~364-65.
53. Samuel Eliot Morison, "Columbus as a Navigator:' in Studi Colombiani, op. cit., 2:39-48; and
Admiral of the Ocean Sea, z vols., Little, Brown and Company, Boston, 1942.
54. Newton, op. cit., pp. 88-89.
55. "Genoa . . . operated the most sophisticated credit machinery of the Middle Ages. A detailed study
has shown that the city was already modern, ahead of its time, in the fifteenth century, daily handling
endorsements of bills of exchange and ricorsa agreements, an early form of kite-flying, to use modern
barkers' jargon. Genoa's early role as intermediary between Seville and the New World, her official alliance
with Spain in 1523 did the rest: she became the leading financial city of the world, in the period of rising
inflation and prosperity that characterized the second half of the sixteenth century-the century of Genoa,
the city where commerce was beginning to appear a rather inferior activity." Braudel, The Mediterranean,
op. cit., ~321.
56. Jacob Streider concluded: "The Italian city states developed a colonial system in the Mediterranean, a
system which was a precursor and a prototype for Spain and Portugal in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, and even for Holland in the seventeenth." (Cited by Oliver C. Cox, The Foundations of Capitalism, Philosophical Library, New York, 1959, p. 85 n. 36.)
57. Philip Curtin, "Slavery and Empire," in Vera Rubin and Arthur Tuden (eds.), Comparative Perspectives on Slavery in New WorldPlantation Societies, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 292,27
June 1977, p. 3.
58. Oliver C. Cox, The Foundations of Capitalism, op. cit., p. 70.
59. Sidney M. Greenfield, "Madeira and the Beginnings of New World Sugar Cane Cultivation and
Plantation Slavery: A Study in Institution Building," in Rubin and Tuden (eds.), op. cit., p. 545.
60. Ibid., pp. 541-42.
61. Ibid., p. 548.
62. J. H. Parry, The Establishment of the European Hegemony: 1415-1715, Harper and Row, New York,
1966, p. 73.
63. Leslie R. Rout, Jr., The African Experience in Spanish America, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1976, p. 28.
64. The term "pieza de Indias" (or peca de Indias)-piece of the Indies-became a common or standard
measure of slaves in the late sixteenth century. Just how early it became standardized is unclear but its
general meaning and use has been clarified by Enriqueta Vila and C. R. Boxer. Vila writes: "It can be seen
from the account books of the royal treasury officials [of Spain] that at times, when counting small blacks
ofless than 12 years of age, known as muleques, it was customary to count two of them as one when it came
to the payment of duties. Also suckling infants, known as crias or bambos, were considered free of duties
and formed one 'piece' together with their mothers. All this was applied in an arbitrary manner, with no
fixed standards. The oldest royal decree found so far, regulating the payment of duties on these blacks, is a
cedula of 12 July 1624, addressed by Felipe IV to all the authorities of the Indies, in which are included some
basic rules for general application: a muleque of seven years old should be counted as half a slave, and duty
should not be charged on those of less than that age." Vila, "The Large-Scale Introduction of Africans into
Veracruz and Cartagena," in Rubin and Tuden (eds.), op. cit., p. 270. On the other hand, Boxer asserts:
NOTES T O PAGES 107-1 1

351

"[Tlhe peca de Indias . . . was defined in 1678 as being 'a Negro from fifteen to twenty-five years old; from
eight to fifteen, and from twenty-five to thirty-five, three pass for two; beneath eight, and from thirty-five
to forty-five, two pass for one' sucking infants follow their mothers without accompt; all above forty-five
years, with the diseased, are valued by arbiters." Boxer, The Golden Age of Brazil, 16y-1/50, University of
California Press, Berkeley 1962, p. 5.
65. Jan Vansina, Kingdoms of the Savanna, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1966, p. 53 (cited by J.
E. Inikori, "Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: A Rejoinder by J. E. Inikori:' Journal ofAfrican History 17,
no. 4 [i976]: 613).
66. Ibid., p. 52.
67. K. G. Davies, The Royal African Company, Atheneum, New York, 1970, p. 13; Enriqueta Vila, op. cit.,
passim.
68. Vila, op. cit., p. 275; Walter Rodney reported that "Most of the slaves imported into Mexico and
Central America during the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries were from the upper Guinea coast."
Rodney,"Portuguese Attempts at Monopoly on the Upper Guinea Coast, 1580-1650,'' Journal of African
History6, no. 3 (1965): 309.
69. J. E. Inikori, "Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: An Assessment of Curtin and Anstey," Journal of
African History, 17, no. 2 (1976): 204-5.
70. Roderick MacDonald, "The Williams Thesis: A Comment on the State of Scholarship," Caribbean
Quarterly, 25, no. 3 (September 1979): 63.
71. Curtin, The Atlantic Slave Trade: A Census, op. cit., p. 87.
72. Inikori's criticisms are important enough to warrant quotation. Of Curtin's statistics Inikori writes:
"All the computations required by the formula employ only two slave population figures-the figure at the
beginning and the figure at the end of the given period. While this poses no problme for compound
interest calculations. . .the same is not true for a slave population that was subject to considerable hazards
(which may have had no regular pattern) affecting the year-to-year movement of the total population and
import figures." "Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: An Assessment:' op. cit., p. 198. Respecting Curtin's
historical sensitivities, Inikori states: "The amount of historical evidence supporting my argumentin this
aspect of my original paper is really so substantial that only Curtin's ignorance of the historical data can
make him write in the way he does. General statistical theory of random error does not take precedence
over historical data. . . . Arguments about the inaccuracy of official records based on a large amount of
historical data can only be countered with opposing historical data, not with vague theories of random
error. . . . In fact, all the statements made by government officials which I quoted in my original paper were
based on actual investigations." "Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: A Rejoinder:' op. cit., p. 617. Finally,
of Curtin's logic of defense, Inikori cautions: "The key to a proper understanding of Curtin's comments is
his statement that what I said deliberately falsified the estimates so as to minimize the size of the trade.
Ordinary error without a political or other bias would be more random; . . . With this misconception it
apparently became an emotional issue for Curtin to defend his 'honor' at all cost. . . . The logic that runs
through Curtin's paper is that only 'a political or other bias' can skew the frequency of error in a set of
estimates in one direction. . . . The naivety of this logic is too obvious to warrant much comment. Suffice it
to say that the frequency of error in a set of estimates can be skewed in any direction for several reasons that
have nothing to do with 'a political or other bias.' And, for that matter, a man can have a political motive
and yet produce an accurate estimate." Ibid., pp. 609-10.
73. Inikori, "Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: A Rejoinder," op. cit., p. 615.
74. D. Eltis, "The Direction and Fluctuation of the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade, 1821-43: A Revision of the
1845 Parliamentary Paper," unpublished paper presented at the Mathematical Social Science Board Seminar on the Economics of the Slave Trade, Colby College, Waterville, Maine, 20-22 August 1975; Roger
Anstey, The Atlantic Slave Trade and British Abolition, 1760-1810, Humanities Press, Atlantic Highlands,
N.J.; and idem., "The Volume and Profitability of the British Slave Trade, 1761-1807," in Stanley Engerman
and Eugene Genovese (eds.), Race and Slavery in the Western Hemisphere, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, 1975, pp. 3-31; Serge Daget, "La Repression Britannique sur les Negriers Fran~aisdu Traffic
Illegal: Quelques conditions generales ou specifiques," unpublished paper presented at Maine, 20-22
August 1975; Lucien Peytraud, L'Esclavage aux Antilles Franfais avant 1789 d'apres des documents inedits des
Archives Coloniales, These Presentee a la Faculte des Lettres de Paris, Paris, 1897; and Ralph Davis, The Rise of
the Atlantic Economies, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1973.
75. Inikori does not present a total for the Atlantic slave trade. This figure was arrived at by totalling the
amounts for the French West Indies, Brazil, and the English colonies which appear in Inikori's two essays,
and interpolating an amount for Spanish America consistent with Inikori's treatment of pre-nineteenthcentury Brazil's slave population. From Inikori's first essay ("Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: An
Assessment," op. cit.), the numbers for the French West Indies are 3,000,000. For the English colonies in
the eighteenth century and Brazil in the first half of the nineteenth century, the numbers are 3,699,572 and
3,700,000 respectively ("Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: A Rejoinder:' op cit., pp. 623-24).
76. For Curtin's statement see note 52, chapter IV. I or D. R. Murray's critique of Curtin's figures, see
312 NOTES T O PAGES I1 1 - 12

"Statistics of the Slave Trade in Cuba, 1790-1867," Journal of Latin American Studies 3, no. 2 (November
1971): 131-49. Richard Pares concurs with Curtin on this matter: "M. Debien has observed that the trickle
of indentured peasants . . . dried up at various times in the second half of the seventeenth century: after
1666 few more such servants were sent to French St. Christopher; after 1685 few more to Guadeloupe. The
same contrast can be seen between the older settled sugar colonies, like Barbados, which soon ceased to
demand the services of any white men from Europe besides specialists, and the newer settlements, like
Jamaica, which still, for a time, welcomed unskilled white labourers. Specialists-tradesmen, coachmen,
refiners, private tutors-were still sent out to the plantations for another century; but the peasant, with his
two hands and nothing much else, was no longer in demand. His place had been taken by an African."
Pares, Merchants and Planters, Economic History Review Supplement, no.e, 1960, p. 19.
77. See note 47, previous chap.
78. Williams, Capitalism and Slavery, op. cit., p. 63.
79. Ibid., p. 61.
80. Herman Merivale, Lectures on Colonization and Colonies, Longman, Green, Longman, and Roberts,
London, 1861 (repr. by Augustus Kelley, New York, 1967), p. 302.
81. Roderick McDonald, op. cit. pp. 65-66.
82. James Burke, Connections, Little, Brown, Boston, 1978, p. 192.
83. Robert Carlyle Batie, "Why Sugar, Economic Cycles and the Changing of Staples on the English and
French Antilles, 1624-54: Journal of Caribbean History 8 (November 1976): 4-13.
84. P. G. M. Dickson, The Financial Revolution in England, Macmillan, London, 1967, pp. 55-56.
85. C. L. R. James, The BlackJacobins, op. cit., pp. 47-48
86. Roderick McDonald, op. cit., pp. 63-64.
87. Richard Pares, op. cit., p. 38.
88. Ibid., p. 50.
89. Ibid., p. 33. The Davies piece to which Pares refers is K. G. B. Davies, "The Origin of the Commission
System in the West India Trade," Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 5th ser., vol. 2 (1952): 89-107.
90. Viva, op. cit., p. 277 n. 9.
91. Cited by Roderick McDonald in his "Measuring the British Slave Trade to Jamaica, 1789-1808: A
Comment," Economic History Review33, no. 2 (May 1980): 257-58.
92. Pares, op. cit., pp. 2-6.
93. Ibid., pp. 11, 63 n. 54; and Batie, op. cit., p. 1.
94. Pares, op. cit., p. 16.
95. Richard B. Moore, "On Barbadians and Minding Other People's Business," New World Quarterly 3,
nos. 1 and 2, Dead Season and Croptime (1966/1967):69.
96. Batie, op. cit., pp. 4-13; and Richard S. Dunn, Sugar and Slaves: The Rise of the Planter Class in the
English West Indies, 1624-1713, University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 1972, p. 203.
97. Batie, op. cit., p. 16.
98. Ibid., pp. i5,ig.
99. Curtin, The Atlantic Slave Trade, op. cit., p. 126.
loo. Ibid, pp. 118-26.
101. See Inikori, "Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: A Rejoinder," op. cit., p. 619.
102. Curtin's figures are used here not for their accuracy but for their relative weights. Curtin, The
Atlantic Slave Trade, op. cit., p. 119.
103. Inikori, "Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: A Rejoinder," op. cit., pp. 612-15.
104. Curtin, The Atlantic Slave Trade, op. cit., chap. lo. This figure, it must be recalled, is only an
"estimate" of the number of deaths associated with the British slave trade in the eighteenth century. For
France, during the same century, Robert Stein, who (without attribution) puts the French slave trade at
1,150,000, also claims that "no fewer than 150,000 died before reaching the New World, and many more
died within a year or two of arrival." Stein, "Mortality in the Eighteenth-Century French Slave Trade,"
Journal ofAfrican History 21, no. 1(1980): 35.
105. Curtin, ibid., p. 282. For the period 1714-78, Stein puts the death "rate" of crews in the French slave
trade at 13 percent and argues: "crew mortality was on the average higher than slave mortality at least along
the coast and on the Middle Passage:' Stein, "Mortality in the Eighteenth-Century French Slave Trade," op.
cit., p p 36-37.
106. Curtin, ibid, pp. 139-40.
107. Orlando Patterson, The Sociology of Slavery, Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, Rutherford, 1969,
PP. 134-44,
108. Curtin, The Atlantic Slave Trade, op. cit., pp. 91-2.
109. Ibid., pp. 83,268.
no. Inikori, "Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: An Assessment:' op. cit., p. 222.
111. Curtin, The Atlantic Slave Trade, op. cit., pp. 144,156-58.
112. Gerald Mullin, Flight and Rebellion, Oxford University Press, New York, 1972, p. 7.
NOTES T O PAGES 1 1 3 - 1 9

353

113. Ibid., p. 43.
114. For the background of the Black maroon settlements of seventeenth-century Virginia and the AfroIndian (Seminole) settlements of eighteenth-century Florida, see chapter 7. An early account of the
Seminoles is given by Josh Giddings (1858).
115. See Nwabueze F. Okoye, "Chattel Slavery as the Nightmare of the American Revolutionaries,"
William and Mary Quarterly, 37 (January 1980): 3-5; Jeffrey Crow, "Slave Rebelliousness and Social
Conflict in North Carolina 1775-1802:' William and Mary Quarterly, ibid., p. 89; C. L. R. James, "The
Atlantic Slave Trade," in James, The Future in the Present, Lawrence Hill, Westport, 1977, p. 246.
116. Walter Rodney, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa, Howard University Press, Washington D.C.,
1972.
117. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto, in Robert C. Tucker (ed.), The MarxEngels Reader, W. W. Norton, New York, 1978, p. 478

Chapter Six
I. Cabral, "National Liberation and Culture," in Return to the Source, Africa Information Service, 1973,
PP. 42-43.
2. Michael Craton, "Proto-Peasant Revolts?: The Late Slave Rebellions in the British West Indies 18161832," Past and Present 85 (November 1979): 120-21. Robert Lacerte's work on the first four decades of
Haitian independence, despite a tendency toward questionable assertions and presumptions (he persists in
designating France as Haiti's "mother country" and declares that the presence of "whites" was indispensable for Haiti's post-revolutionary economic recovery), supports Craton's characterization of African
peasant predispositions regarding plantation agriculture and land tenure. See Lacerte, "The First Land
Reform in Latin America: The Reforms of Alexander Petion, 1809-1814,'' Inter-American Economic Affairs
28, no. 4 (Spring 1975): 77-85; and "Xenophobia and Economic Decline: The Haitian Case, 1820-1843," The
Americas 37, no. 4 (April 1981): 499-515.
3. John Blassingame, The Slave Community, Oxford University Press, New York, 1972, pp. 189-216.
4. Ibid., p. 197.
5. Ibid., p. 201.
6. Ibid., p. 213.
7. On more than one occasion, Blassingame contends that: "It is no accident that the Sambo of Southern
novels and plays was usually a house servant. Because the planters often had little contact with field hands,
in white autobiographies it is almost always the house servant who is portrayed as the epitome of loyalty. . . . One reflection of the faithfulness of house servants and the low level of contact between field hands
and whites is that, in an overwhelming majority of the cases where masters manumitted individual slaves,
they were house servants." (Ibid., pp. zoo-201.) On the other hand, Owens reminds us that: "Masters
tortured and murdered some domestics, and house slaves killed slaveholders. Many acts against domestics
went unpunished. . . . It is not easy to generalize about house slaves. They were a diverse class of bondsmen
who helped to shape and reshape the character of their servitude in the Big House. In some respects theirs
was a special kind of enslavement marked by privileges that most field hands never experienced, at least not
in the same way. They did not, however, give in to it." Leslie Howard Owens, This Species of Property,
Oxford University Press, New York, 1976, p. 120. Furthermore, Kenneth Stampp in The Peculiar Institution,
Vintage Books, New York, 1956, states that at least a quarter of the American slave population in the
nineteenth century were claimed by slaveholders "who had at their command as few as a half dozen
fieldhands. . . . Lacking skilled craftsmen in their small slave forces, they still found it necessary to perform
certain specialized tasks such as carpentering and repairing tools; and in an emergency (a crop rarely went
from spring planting to fall harvesting without a crisis of some kind) they temporarily forgot their pride. . .
a master often had to choose between losing his crop and pitching in with his slaves" (p. 35).
8. Blassingame, op. cit., pp. ~goff.
g. Owens, op. cit., p. 78.
lo. "At the core of such behavior was the slave's lack of accommodation to much that confronted him in
bondage. Bondage continually worked against the bondsman, though he never left its functioning untempered with. The frustration was enormous." Ibid., p. 93.
11. Ibid., pp. 79-96.
12. Ibid., p. 103.
13. Ibid., p. 96.
14. Ibid., p. 103.
15. "The Southern planter suffered, not simply for his economic mistakes-the psychological effect of
slavery upon him was fatal. The mere fact that a man could be, under the law, the actual master of the mind
and body of human beings had to have disastrous effects. It tended to inflate the ego of most planters
beyond all reason; they became arrogant, strutting, quarrelsome kinglets; they issued commands; they
made laws; they shouted their order; they expected deference and self-abasement; they were choleric and
354

NOTES TO PAGES 1 1 9 - 2 4

easily insulted. Their 'honor' became a vast and awful thing, requiring wide and insistent deference. Such
of them as were inherently weak and inefficient were all the more easily angered, jealous and resentful;
while the few who were superior, physically or mentally, conceived no bounds to their power and personal
prestige. As the world had long learned, nothing is so calculated to ruin human nature as absolute power
over human beings." W. E. B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction in America, Harcourt, Brace and Company,
New York, 1935, pp. 52-53. Earlier in the same work, Du Bois had noted: "[Tlhere is evidence that the
necessities of their economic organization were continually changing and deteriorating their morale and
pushing forward ruder, noisier, less cultivated elements than characterized the Southern gentleman of
earlier days. Certainly, the cursing, brawling, whoring gamblers who largely represented the South in the
late fifties, evidenced the inevitable deterioration that overtakes men when their desire for income and
extravagance overwhelms their respect for human beings" (p. 43). James Roark, matching the desperation
of the antebellum secessionist planter ideologues with the sentiments of such as Mary Ann Whittle, a
plantation mistress ("we have an enemy in our bosoms who will shoot us in our beds"), and the Mississippian William Kirkland (who declared he had rather " 'be exterminated' than be forced to live in the same
society 'with the slaves if freed' "), concluded: "Mixing reality with fantasy, planters feared that John Bull,
Billy Yank, Johnny Poor White, and Nat Turner were all lurking in the shadows. That vision knotted the
stomachs of more than just the cowardly." Masters Without Slaves, W. W. Norton, New York, 1977, pp. 4,
10,16.
16. Among the revisionists might be included the names of Ira Berlin (Slaves Without Masters); Douglas
Daniels (Pioneer Urbanites); Eric Foner (Free Soil, Free Labor, Free Men); George M. Frederickson (The
Black Image in the White Mind); Eugene Genovese (Roll, Jordan, Roll and From Rebellion to Revolution);
Herbert Gutman (The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom); Nathan Huggins (John Brown); Lawrence
Levine (Black Culture and Black Consciousness); Leon Litwack (Been in the Storm So Long); Stephen Oates
(To Purge This Land with Blood); Nell Imin Painter (The Exodusters); Albert Raboteau (The Slave Religion);
George Rawick (From Sundown to Sunup); Willie Lee Rose (Rehearsal For Reconstruction); and Robert
Starobin (Industrial Slavery in the Old South).
17. Thomas Jefferson, a major slaveholder at the end of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the
nineteenth and as president of the United States during its fledgling republicanism, bore an importance
and significance to his own and subsequent American generations of literati that make of his life a prime
illustration of the contradictory intuitions and social forces besetting the master class (and its subsequent
apologists). Winthrop Jordan submits that for Jefferson, the humanity of the slaves was never in question:
"Without question Negroes were members of that class. Hence Jefferson never for a moment considered
the possibility that they might rightfully be enslaved." White Over Black, Penguin, Baltimore, 1969, p. 432.
Still, Jefferson's racial sensibilities mixed his belief in the moral identity between Blacks and whites with his
resistance to any consideration of equal passions, mental'capacities, or sense of human beauty between
Blacks and whites. Jordan exclaims: "Jefferson's confusion at times became monumental" (p. 453). Perhaps
Jefferson's confusion was a product of his alleged relationship with his enslaved chambermaid, Sally
Hemings. The alleged relationship has certainly taken its toll on some of his biographers. For example:
John Chester Miller, The Wolf by the Ears, New American Library, New York, 1977. Miller begins his
refutation of the accusations first leveled by Jefferson's contemporary, James Callender, by assuring his
reader that Ms Hemings was not "black" as she was sometimes called, but actually a "quadroon." Miller
then maintains that Sally Hemings was the last child of 14 ("of varying shades of color") born to this slave
woman Betty Hemings and John Wayles, a wealthy Virginia planter. Wayles was, of course, also the father
of Martha Skelton Wayles, Jefferson's bride in 1772. In 1773, Wayles died and his slave children and his
mistress became the property of Jefferson at Monticello (p. 162), Miller suggests: "The special treatment
meted out to Betty Hemings and her offspring by Jefferson may have assuaged but it hardly could have
removed the harrowing sense of guilt Jefferson experienced by holding his late [she died in 17821wife's halfbrothers and half-sisters in servitude, particularly since he could see in these mulattoes the lineaments of
his own wife. It is no wonder, therefore, that he conceived the overwhelming antipathy toward miscegenation which led him to favor putting all Afro-Americans beyond the possibility of admixture with whites. If,
as the evidence indicates, his attitude toward mulattoes underwent a radical change in 1772-1773 it was
probably owing to the astonishing discovery he made at that time of the sexual practices of his late fatherin-law" (p. 163). Later, Miller argues that: "For Jefferson to have conducted a clandestine love affair with a
slave woman and to have raised his children as slaves is completely at variance with his character, insofar as
it can be determined by his acts and words" (p. 177). But then, "Jefferson asked to be judged by his acts
rather than his words. But on the issue of slaver-in America he emerges with greater luster if he is judged
by his words rather than by his acts. For here he signally failed to live up to his own precepts." "Clearly,
Jefferson shared the racial prejudice which compounded the problem of ridding the United States of what
he called 'this great political and moral evil,' 'this blot on our country.' But he succeeded in concealing this
prejudice from himself by imagining that he was acting in response to divine edicts" (pp. 277,178). A final
irony in Miller's defense of Jefferson's sexual morality is his argument that the proof that Jefferson had no
special relationship with his chambermaid is that in his will he manumitted five slaves, all Hemingses. "But
NOTES TO PAGES 1 2 4 - 2 5

355

Sally Hemings was not among those manumitted: her name appeared o n the slave inventory o f his estate
and her value was set at fifty dollars" ( p . 168). Hardly the act o f a m a n wracked b y guilt at t h e sight o f his
dead wife's "lineament." But the precedent o f the Brazilian master, Pedro Domingues, " w h o consumed b y
jealousy at the thought o f his concubine marrying . . . granted her her freedom, the ownership o f his house
and three slaves, o n the condition that she should stay single for the rest o f her life:' C . R. Boxer, Women in
Iberian Expansion Overseas, 1415-1815, Oxford University Press, N e w York, 1975, p. 59.
18. Eric Williams, From Columbus to Castro, Harper and Row, New York, 1970, p p 37-38. One indication
o f the official attitude toward European labor was the apparent willingness o f the authorities t o suspend
the racial hierarchies o f Iberia i n exchange for the generating o f viable colonial settlements. C . R. Boxer
recounts that despite the vigor o f "race-prejudice" during this period o f Iberian history ("concentrated
against the 'Moors' (e.g. Muslims) and the Jews, mainly for religious reasons") and Africans ( f o r their
association with slavery), royal instructions and orders were sent out t o the colonies i n 1503 and 1514
encouraging inter-racial marriages between Europeans and Indians. Women in Iberian Expansion, op. cit.,
pp. 35-37.
19. Ibid., pp. 37-41.
20. Richard Hart cites the Spanish historian, Oviedo, w h o i n 1546 wrote that the capitalization o f a West
Indian sugar plantation "often requires an investment o f ten or twelve thousand gold ducats before it is
complete and ready for operation. And i f I should say fifteen thousand ducats I should not be exaggerating,
for they require at least eighty or one hundred Negroes working all the time, and even one hundred and
twenty or more t o b e well supplied; and close b y a good herd or two o f a thousand or t w o or three thousand
head o f cattle t o feed the workers; aside from the expensive trained workers and foremen for making the
sugar, and carts t o haul the cane t o the mill and bring wood." Hart, Slaves W h o Abolished Slavery, vol.1,
Blacks in Bondage, Institute o f Social and Economic Research, University o f the West Indies, Jamaica, 1980,
p. 17.
21. Eric Williams, From Columbus to Castro, op. cit., p. 30.
22. C . H. Haring, The Spanish Empire in America, Harcourt, Brace and World, New York, 1963, p. 41.
23. Ibid., p. 33. Nicolas Sanchez-Albornoz disagrees with the figures b u t comes t o the same conclusion.
" T h e decline was undoubtedly o f disastrous proportions. Even accepting conservative estimates, the preColumbian population o f Hispaniola must have fallen from about one hundred thousand t o only a few
hundred in 1570. T o make u p for the lack o f natives, Negro slaves and Indians from the Bahamas were
introduced at an early date. That measure alone proves that depopulation there was worse than o n the
mainland." Sanchez-Albornoz, The Population of Latin America: A History, University o f California Press,
Berkeley, 1974, p. 42.
24. Sherburne Cook and Woodrow Borah, The Aboriginal Population of Central Mexico on the Eve of the
Spanish Conquest, University o f California Press, Berkeley, 1963, pp. 72-88.
25. Cited i n Alfred W . Crosby, Jr., 7'he Columbian Exchange, Greenwood Press, Westport, 1977, p. 36. See
also Sanchez-Albornoz, op. cit., pp. 60-66.
26. David Davidson, "Negro Slave Control and Resistance i n Colonial Mexico, 1519-1650," Hispanic
American Historical Review 46, no. 3 (August 1966): 236. Alfred Crosby disputes the role o f "brutality" i n
the destruction o f native peoples. He argues: " T h e destruction o f the Arawaks has been largely blamed o n
the Spanish cruelty, n o t only b y the later Protestant historians o f the 'Black Legend' school b u t also b y such
contemporary Spanish writers as Oviedo and Bartolome de Las Casas. W i t h o u t doubt the early Spaniards
brutally exploited the Indians. But it was obviously not i n order t o kill t h e m o f f ,for the early colonists had
t o deal with a chronic labor shortage and needed the Indians. Disease would seem t o be a more logical
explanation." Crosby, op. cit., p. 45. Both the impulses o f greed and the dialectic o f domination have
claimed for their victim the logic o f need.
27. David Davidson, op. cit., p. 236; and for a critical assessment o f the figure originally developed b y
Cook, Borah and Lesley Byrd Simpson, see Rudolph A. Zambardino, "Mexico's Population i n the Sixteenth
Century: Demographic Anomaly or Mathematical Illusion?," Journal of Interdisciplinary History 11, no. 1
(Summer 1980): 1-27; and o n the New World in general, see Sanchez-Albornoz, op. cit., pp. 32-36.
28. T h e works b y Sauer ( T h e Early Spanish Main, 1969) and Jaramillo Uribe ("La poblacion indigene de
Colombia en el m o m e n t o de la Conquista y sus transformaciones posteriores," Anuario colombiano de
historia social y de la cultural, no. 2 [1964]:239-93) are cited b y Sanchez-Albornoz, op. cit., p. 54. Jaramillo
Uribe is also cited for the following excerpt from Father Gumilla's Orinoco ilustrado: "[Elxperienced
observers have noted that i n areas where the Indian population has been noticeably reduced, m a n y Indian
w o m e n are childless and completely sterile . . . ; in those same places and areas, Indian w o m e n married t o
Europeans and t o mestizas, cuaterones, malattoes, zambos, and Negroes are so fertile and produce so many
children that they can rival Jewishw o m e n i n this regard. . . . T h e differenceis that the Indian w o m a n with
an Indian husband produces humble Indian children . . . Indian children are subject t o depression, are
spiritless and fearful and obliged t o pay tribute, which though n o t excessive is regarded as a burden and a
stigma. . . ;the majority o f Indians have one child only, t o satisfy their creative instincts and then take herbs
t o prevent the arrival o f others." Sanchez-Albornoz, ibid., p. 56.
356

NOTES T O PAGES 125-26

29. Peter Boyd-Bowman, "Negro Slaves in Early Colonial Mexico," The Americas 26, no. 2 (October
1969):136.
30. Bartolome de Las Casas, The Devastation of the Indies: A BriefAccount, Seabury Press, New York, 1974
(orig. 1542), p. 27.
31. Quoted by Eric Williams, From Columbus to Castro, op. cit., p. 43.
32. Introduction by Hans Magnus Enzensberger to Las Casas, op. cit., p. 26.
33. Ibid., pp. 29-30.
34. "But why Africans as the new slaves? Because of exhaustion of the supply of laborers indigenous to
the region of the plantations, because Europe needed a source of labor from a reasonably well-populated
region that was accessible and relatively near the region of usage. But it had to be from a region that was
outside its world-economy so that Europe could feel unconcerned about the economic consequences for
the breeding region of wide-scale removal of manpower as slaves. Western Africa filled the bill best."
Wallerstein, The Modern World-System, op. cit., p. 89. See also Sanchez-Albornoz, op. cit., p. 72.
35. D. Davidson, op. cit., p. 236.
36. See chapter five, note 68 and text.
37. Antonio Vazquez de Espinosa recounts some of the measures used by Spanish colonists to delay the
loss of Indian labor: "[A]lthough the Royal Council of the Indies . . . has tried to remedy this evil with
warrants and the amelioration of this great hardship and enslavement of the Indians, and the Viceroy of
New Spain appoints mill inspectors. . . since most of those who set out on such commissions, aim rather at
their own enrichment. . . and since the mill owners pay them well, they leave the wretched Indians in the
same slavery. . . . [Tlhe mill owners keep places provided in the mills in which they hide the wretched
Indians against their will, so that they do not see or find them, and the poor fellows cannot complain about
their wrongs." Compendium and Description of the West Indies, Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C., 1942 (orig. 1629), p. 134.
38. J. H. Parry, Cambridge EconomicHistory of Europe, 4x99, cited by Wallerstein, op. cit., p. 187 n. 109.
39. D. Davidson, op. cit., p. 237.
40. Aguirre Beltran is cited by Rout, op. cit., p. 279. Edgar Love and Rout both call attention to the fact
that Baron Alexander de Humboldt, the late eighteenth-century Prussian historical demographer, in his
study of Mexico (Political Essay on the Kingdom ofNew Spain, 1793),had remarked "it appears that in all of
New Spain there are not six thousand Negroes, and not more than nine or ten thousand slaves, of whom
the greatest number belong to the ports of Acapulco and Veracruz." (See Love, "Negro Resistance to
Spanish Rule in Colonial Mexico," Journal ofNegro Historyp, no. 2 (April 1967):89.) Rout commented: "A
contradictory picture is presented by Sherburne I. Cook, who was probably the first investigator to make a
careful analysis of the 1793 royal census. Cook reveals that Spanish authorities estimated zambos, blacks,
and mulattoes at 12 to 15 percent of the viceroyalty's 5,200,ooo inhabitants." Rout, ibid.
41. Richard R. Wright, the Black historian, wrote at the beginning of this century: "It was during the year
1501 that Columbus was deposed from the government of the Indies, and he may probably himself have
been cognizant of the fact that Negro slaves had been introduced into the new Spanish possessions." "The
year 1501is the date of the earliest reference in American history to Negroes coming from Spain to America.
Sir Arthur Helps, in his Spanish Conquest in America, states that, in the year mentioned, instructions were
given to the authorities that while Jews, Moors, or new converts were not to be permitted to go to the Indies
or to remain there, 'Negroes born in the power of Christians were to be allowed to pass to the Indies.' "
Wright, "Negro Companions of the Spanish Explorers," American Anthropologist 4, no. 2 (AprilIJune
1902): 218. (Wright's piece bore this note from the editor of the journal: "The interest in this paper is
enhanced by the fact that it is the result of research by a native of the race which took such a prominent part
in the discovery and colonization of the New World." Ibid., p. 217.)
42. Rout, op. cit., p. 22.
43. Ibid., pp. 22-23,
44. See Rout, ibid.; and R. R. Wright, op. cit., pp. 218-19.
45. Rout, ibid., p. 24.
46. Ibid., p. 75.
47. Peter Gerhard, "A Black Conquistador in Mexico," Hispanic American Historical Review 58, no. 3
(August 1978): 452.
48. Ibid., p. 459. Gerhard notes: "Perhaps Garrido died in the great plague that was raging in 1547. On the
other hand, someone called Juan Garrido was alive in Cuernavaca in March 1552." Ibid.
49. See R. R. Wright, op. cit., pp. 223-28.
50. Peter Boyd-Bowman in his "Negro Slaves in Early Colonial Mexico:' op. cit., pp. 150-51, reproduces
Alonso Valiente's formal claim on Juan Valiente from the Puebla archives.
51. Franco, "Maroons and Slave Rebellions in the Spanish Territories," in Richard Price (ed.), Maroon
Societies, Anchor, Garden City, 1973, p. 36; also see R. R. Wright, op. cit., pp. 220-21; and Rout, op. cit., p. 75.
52. See Georges Scelle, "The Slave-Trade in the Spanish Colonies of America: The Assiento," American
Journal of International Law 4, no. 3 (July 1910): 619.
NOTES T O PAGES 127-29

357

53. See Rout, op. cit., pp. 77-79.
54. Ibid., p. 99. C . H. Haring commented: " I n early days i n t h e colonies, w h e n fear o f servile insurrection
was widespread, some o f the local legislation regarding Negro slaves was very barbarous." The Spanish
Empire in America, op. cit., p. 202.
55. G. Aguirre Beltran, "Races i n 17th Century Mexico," Phylon 6 , no. 3 (1945):215.
56. Colin Palmer, "Religion and Magic i n Mexican Slave Society, 1570-1650," i n Stanley 1.. Engerman and
Eugene D. Genovese (eds.), Race and Slavery in the Western Hemisphere: Quantitative Studies, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, 1975, p. 311.
57. Boyd-Bowman, op. cit., p. 134.
58. See Haring, op. cit., p. 206; Rout, op. cit., pp. 104-5; and R. R. Wright, op. cit., p. 222. David Davidson
recalls: " [ I l n1523, t h e first slaves t o revolt i n the colony erected crosses t o celebrate their freedom 'and t o let
it b e k n o w n that t h e y were Christians.' " Davidson, op. cit., p. 242.
59. Rout, op. cit., p. 101.
60. Ibid., pp. 104-5.
61. Scelle, Histoire Politique de La Traite Negriere aux Indes de Castille, z vols., Larose and Forcel, Paris,
1906,1:167; and Jose L. Franco, op. cit., p. 35.
62. Quoted b y Edgar Love, op. cit., p. 96.
63. Ibid., pp. 93,95.
64. D. Davidson, op. cit., p. 244.
65. Ibid., pp. 145-46; see also Love, op. cit., p. 94.
66. D. Davidson, op. cit., pp. 249-50.
67. Love, op. cit., p. 97. Davidson follows t h e Jesuit Juan Laurencio i n describing Yanga as a member
o f the "Bron" (i.e., Brong) nation, a n Akan-speaking people o f present-day Ghana. Laurencio was a m e m ber o f t h e expedition led b y Captain Pedro Gonzalo de Herrera that succeeded i n bringing Yanga's
settlement t o a truce w i t h Spanish authorities i n the early m o n t h s o f 1609. D. Davidson, op. cit., p. 247.
Rout asserts that Yanga "claimed t o b e a Congolese prince." Op. cit., p. 106. See Rout, ibid., pp. 30,336 n n . 1
and 2 for a discussion o f the confusion surrounding the use o f t h e terms "Bron" and "Brarn" i n Mexican
historiography.
68. Love writes: "During the latter part o f t h e sixteenth century the Spanish had t o put d o w n slave
insurrections i n Pachuca, Guanajuato, Juaspaltopic, Alvarado, Coatzacoalcos, Misantla, Jalapa, Huatulco,
Tlalixcoyan, Zongolicia, Riconada, Huatusco, Orizaba, Rio Blanco, A n t o n Lizardo, Medellin, and Cuernavaca." Op. cit., p. 98. Love also describes the slave rebellion that t o o k place i n Mexico City i n 1612, ibid.,
pp. 98-99. Rout observed: "Over a century later, t h e same general vicinity o f Veracruz state, slave uprisings
i n sugar mills around t h e t o w n o f Cordoba (1725 and 1735) culminated i n the mass flight o f b o n d m e n and a
sudden burgeoning o f cimarron activity. . . . Meanwhile, o n the other coast, especially during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, slaves fleeing t h e Pacific Ocean ports o f Guatulco and Acapulco set u p
palenquesin the coastal highlands o f t h e costa chica." Rout, op. cit., pp. 106-7.
69. See William B. Taylor, " T h e Foundation o f Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe de 10s Morenos de Amapa,"
The Americas 26, no. 4 (April 1970): 439-46.
70. See Aquiles Escalante, "Palenques i n Colombia:' i n Richard Price (ed.), Maroon Societies, op. cit., pp.
76-77; and Rout, op. cit., p. 109.
71. See Miguel Acosta Saignes, "Life i n a Venezuelan Cumbe," i n Richard Price, op. cit., pp. 64-73; and
Rout, op. cit., p. 111.
72. Ennes accepts the rationalization that the enslavement o f Blacks was necessary since "the European
could not stand the sun. . . . Nor did t h e Indian submit t o the intensive and continuous labor so essential
for the progress o f these industries." He continues his racialist constructions b y praising "the Paulista strain
which definitely t o o k t h e lead, thanks t o t h e heroic and adventurous spirit (sic) which they had inherited
with their Portuguese background." Ennes, " T h e Palmares 'Republic' o f Pernambuco: Its Final Destruction, 1697," The Americas 5, no. 2 (October 1948): 200.
73. Ibid., p. 201.
74. Arthur Ramos, The Negro i n Brazil, Associated Publishers, Washington D.C., 1951 (orig. 1939), pp.
39-40. Stuart Schwartz maintains: "Through t h e first three centuries o f Brazilian history runs a thread o f
slave resistance and colonist fear." " T h e Mocambo: Slave Resistance i n Colonial Bahia:' Journal of Social
History3, no. 4 ( S u m m e r 1970): 313.
75. A. J.R. Russell-Wood, "Black and Mulatto Brotherhoods i n Colonial Brazil: A Study i n Collective
Behavior," Hispanic American Historical Review 54, no. 4 (November 1974):571. O n pp. 573-74 i n the same
article, Russell-Wood asserts: " T h e presence o f groups o f runaway slaves (quilombos) and uprisings b y
blacks and mulattoes (infinitely rarer than t h e 'running scared' correspondence o f governors and t o w n
rouncils would suggest) might b e advanced as evidence o f psychosocial cohesion among such people. In
fac such alliances as there m a y have been proved temporary and t o o fragile t o sustain challenge over a
peric 1oftime." This, and similar comments, as well as reviews o f t h e bibliographic and reference materials
for this article and his previous study (Fidalgos and Philanthropists, University o f California Press, Berkeley,
358

NOTES T O PAGES 1 3 0 - 3 3

1968),suggest that Russell-Wood has chosen to ignore or dismiss most of the studies of Blacks in Brazil that
have focused on the quilombos.
76. Schwartz, "The Mocambo:' op. cit., p. 317.
n.Representative works of those not cited elsewhere are: Edison Carneiro, Guerras de Los Palmares
(1944) and Ladinos e crioulos (1964); Donald Pierson, Negroes in Brazil (1942); and Raymundo Nina
Rodrigues, 0 s Africanos no Brasil (1935).
78. Irene Diggs, "Zumbi and the Republic of 0 s Palmares," Phylon 14, no. 1 (1953): 62.
79. R. K. Kent, "Palmares: An African State in Brazil," Journal ofAfrican History6, no. 2 (1965): 167-69.
80. Ibid., p. 162.
81. Ibid., p. 172.
82. Ibid., pp. 172-73.
83. Ramos, op. cit., p. 61; see also Diggs, op. cit., pp. 62-70.
84. Ramos writes: "The customs and usages of Palmares were modelled on those of Bantu origin with
such changes and adaptations as the needs of a community in the new world required. On this, as well as
many other points, our sources of information are inadequate." Ibid., p. 65. Kent, almost a quarter of a
century later, concurs: "Assuming that Loanda was the main embarkation point for Pemambucan slaves,
which is confirmed by the linguistic evidence, the model for Palmares could have come from nowhere else
but central Africa. Can it be pinpointed? . . . The most likely answer is that the political system did not
derive from a particular central African model, but from several. Only a far more detailed study of
Palmares through additional sources in the archives of Angola and Torre do Tombo could refine the
answer." Kent, op. cit., p. 175.
85. Georges Balandier has written: "The procedure of investiture involves the . . . attempt at reinforcement. Thus, in the ancient kingdom of Kongo, it establishes a symbolic return to origins, by means of a
ceremonial that associates the new king, the elders and the people, and invokes the founding partners: the
descendant of the founder and the representatives of the ancient occupants of the region that corresponds
to the royal province, who have become the 'allies' of the Kongo kings. It invokes the spirits of the first
kings. . . . It returns to the time of a history that has become myth and reveals the sovereign as the 'forger'
and guardian of Kongo unity. The enthronement of the king assures not only the legitimacy of the power
held, but also the rejuvenation of the kingship. It gives the people (for a time) the feeling of a new
beginning." Balandier, Political Anthropology, Pantheon, New York, 1970, p. 114. See also Balandier's Daily
Life in the Kingdom of the Kongo, Meridian, New York, 1969, chap. 1.
86. Ennes, op. cit., p. 213; see also Kent, op. cit., p. 173.
87. Ennes, ibid., pp. 209-10; see also Kent, op. cit., pp. 173-74.
88. Some indication of the morality to which Ennes refers with approval are the sentiments expressed by
Colonel Domingos Jorge Velho while justifying his impressment of Indian natives into his army: "[W] e augment our troops, and with them we carry war to those obstinate ones who refuse to give up; and if afterwards
we avail ourselves of them for our plowing, we do them no injustice, because it is that we may sustain them
and also their children no less than ourselves and ours; and so far is this from enslaving them that it rather
does them an inestimable favor in that it teaches them to plow, plant, reap and labor for their own supporta thing which, before the whites teach it to them, they do not know how to do." Ennes, op. cit., p. 207.
89. Ramos, op. cit., p. 40.
90. Barbara Klamon Kopytoff, "The Early Development of Jamaican Maroon Societies," William and
Mary Quarterly35, no. z (April 1978): 287.
91. See Irene Wright, "The Spanish Resistance to the English Occupation of Jamaica 1655-1660," Royal
Historical Society, Transactions, 4th ser., vol. iz (1930): 111-47 (cited by Kopytoff, op. cit., p. 289 n. 4).
92. See H. Orlando Patterson, "Slavery and Slave Revolts: A Sociohistoricd Analysis of the First Maroon
War, 1665-1740,'' in Richard Price (ed.), Maroon Societies, op. cit., pp. 253-55.
93. David Buisseret and S. A. G. Taylor, "Juan de Bolas and His Pelinco," Caribbean Quarterly, 24, nos. 1,
2 (MarchIJune 1978): 5.
94. Ibid., p. 6.
95. Kopytoff, op. cit., pp. 288-92; and H. Orlando Patterson, The Sociology of Slavery, Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, Rutherford, 1969, pp. 267-69.
96. Kopytoff, op. cit., p. 293; and also Patterson, "Slavery and Slave Revolts," op. cit., p. 258.
97. Kopytoff, op. cit., p. 299.
98. Michael Craton, Sinews of Empire, Anchor, Garden City, 1974, p. 218; and also Patterson, The
Sociology of Slavery, op. cit., pp: 185-95
99. Ramos, recalling the mid-seventeenth-century reports of Palmares, writes: "The population included numerous artisans and a king governed with unostentatious justice, allowing no medicine men or
witch doctors among his people." Ramos, op. cit., p. 57.
loo. See Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger, Frederick Praeger, New York, 1966, pp. 94-108.
101. For an example, see Return of Trials of Slaves: Jamaica, 1814-1818, Colonial Office 137-147, Public
Records Office, London.
NOTES TO PAGES 1 3 3 - 3 6

359

102. Patterson, Sociology of Slavery, op. cit., p. 192.
103. See Monica Schuler, 'Was, Alas, Kongo": A Social History of Indentured African Immigration into
Jamaica, 1841-1865, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 1980, pp. 46, 136-37 n. 9; and Craton,
Sinews of Empire, op. cit., p. 366 n. 67.
104. Escalante, op. cit., pp. 77-78. T. Lynn Smith suggests: "[Mlaterials such as the letter dated July 24,
1545, which the Licenciado Miguel Diez Armendariz sent to the King indicate that not only were there
already many Negroes in the colony but that not a few of them had got completely out of hand. This official
raised grave accusations against the government of Cartagena, alleging that for more than nine years
escaped Negroes had been out of control, forcing the Indians to work for them, sacking haciendas, and
stealing women. When he wrote the escaped Negroes had just completed an assault upon the Pueblo of
Tafeme where they killed over 20 persons, stole the gold and other valuables, destroyed the fields of corn,
and carried away more than 250 Indians." Smith, "The Racial Composition of the Population of Colonlbia,' Journal oflnter-American Studies 8, no. 2 (April 1966):229. For the economy of the placer gold region,
see William F. Sharp, "The Profitability of Slavery in the Colombian Choco, 1680-1810,' Hispanic American
Historical Review55, no. 3 (August 1975): 468-95.
105. Rout argues that Benkos was "arbitrarily imprisoned and hanged:' Rout, op. cit., p. 110.
106. Escalante, op. cit., p. 79.
107. "Around 1790 a Captain Latorre was trying to survey a road across the highlands from Cartageria
into the interior when he came into contact with Negroids, many of whom were descendants of the
palenqueros of San Basilio who had not accepted amnesty in 1612 or 1613. A number of bloody battles
ensued before a settlement was reached. . . . All told, the palenqueros from the original settlement of San
Basilio had remained completely independent for almost two centuries." Rout, op. cit., p. 110. William
Sharp maintains a different historical sense from that of Rout and Smith. Sharp declares: "Cimarrones
(runaways) presented a continual problem, and virtually every slave inventory listed one or more slaves as
having fled. However, except in 1728, there were no mass escapes, and most of the slaves who ran away in
1728 were quickly recaptured." Sharp, op. cit., p. 480. Since Sharp is relying o n official archives, he might
have constructively used Licenciado Amendariz's skepticism of official sources (see note 104). As it is,
Sharp has no way of explaining Smith's independent support of Amendariz's report: "[Ilt is interesting to
note that this part of what is now the Departamento of Bolivar is one of the few places in Colombia froin
which come reports of Negro communities in which the African language, dances, and customs, are still
preserved. These small groups of Negroes are said to insist absolutely on endogamous marriage:' Smith,
op. cit., p. 229 n. 23.
108. Rout, op. cit., p. 112. The following account of Venezuela's slave rebellions follows Rout closely.
log. See Jose L. Franco, op. cit., p. 36.
110. "Today, there are Six Bush Negro tribes: the Djuka and Saramaka (each 15,000 to 20,000 people), the
Matawai, Aluku and Paramaka (each closer to z,ooo), and the Kwinti (fewer than 500)." Richard Price, The
Guiana Maroons:A Historical and BibliographicalIntroduction, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore,
1976, PP. 3-4.
nl.Ibid., p. 2.
112. Both quotes are taken from Price, ibid., p. 9.
113. Ibid., p. 21. Monica Schuler, writing of revolts that took place in Suriname as late as the late
eighteenth century, insists on the persistence of ethnicity in the region but is ambiguous about the maroon
communities: "In 1757 and again in 1772 large-scale slave rebellions broke out in Suriname. The Akan seem
to have played an important role in these, and the Bush Negroes were indispensable to them. The latter
revolt dragged on for a number of years with leadership eventually passing to a free-born Maroon."
Schuler, "Ethnic Slave Rebellions in the Caribbean and the Guianas," Journal of Social History 3, no. 4
(Summer 1970):379.
114. Price, op. cit., p. 21.
115. Ibid., pp. 22-23.
116. Ibid., p. 24. Price is referring to a report written in 1770 by Jan Jacob Hartsinck.
117. Ibid.; the quote is from L. D. Herlein, 1718.
118. Ibid., p. 26.
119. Ibid., p. 27.
120. Ibid., p. 3.
121. Johannes King, "Guerrilla Warfare: A Bush Negro View:' in Richard Price (ed.), Maroon Societies,
op. cit., pp. 302-4.
122. Quite recently, the history of the Bush Negroes had an interesting closure: "Several times, the Tribal
[or Paramount] Chiefs (Granmans) of the Bush Negroes had expressed a wish to journey to West Africa,
the land of their origin, in order to re-establish contact. . . . The journey [described here] was offered them
by the Government of Surinam and made during three weeks in November 1970." Sylvia W, de Groot, "The
Bush Negro Chiefs Visit Africa: Diary of an Historic Trip," in Richard Price (ed.), Maroon Societies, op. cit.,
p. 388. De Groot recorded the following observation by one of the chiefs upon his visit with a Ghanaian
360

NOTES TO PAGES 1 3 7 - 4 0

king: "Granman Gazon, speaking in the form of a parable, was to remark: 'A dog is driven away from his
yard. His master does not notice it or, at least, pays little attention to it and does not go looking for him to
bring him back. When the dog finally gets hungry, he tries to find the way back home.' As he explained his
meaning, 'Both the dog and his master (here the king) had fallen asleep for three hundred years. Now the
dog is awake and has also awakened its master' " (p. 394).
123. See Rout, op. cit., pp. 119-20; Schuler, "Ethnic Slave Rebellions," op. cit., pp. 378-82; Francisco Perez
de la Riva, "Cuban Palenques," in Richard Price (ed.), Maroon Societies, op. cit., pp. 49-59; and Jose L.
Franco, op. cit., pp. 41-43.
124. "The period from 1600 to 1750 was dominated by the efforts of England and France first to destroy
Dutch hegemony and then to succeed to the top position. In this long period of relative stagnation . . . the
peripheral areas suffered greatly exacerbated exploitation of the direct producers and reduced advantage of
the indigenous exploiting strata (reduced, that is, by comparison with similar strata in the core countries)."
Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World-System II, Academic Press, New York, 1980, p. 241.
125. E. P. Thompson first used the term "brigandage" to describe this phenomenon. In 1965, while
describing power in England as it assumed form in the second half of the eighteenth century, he wrote: "It
should be seen less as government by an aristocracy . . . than as a parasitism-a racket, which the King
himself could not break into except by becoming the croupier. It was not wholly a parasitism: the business
of the nation had to be carried on, from time to time the 'independent' gentry-and their representatives in
parliament-had to be appeased, there were even occasions (although one after another these are called
into question as the disciples of Namier break into the archives of the last of the great mafiosi) when the
interests of the nation or the class, rather than the family or faction, were consulted. Nor was it only a
parasitism: being conducted upon so gigantic a scale, from bases in private and public wealth of such
magnitude, and commanding influence which reached, by the most direct means, into the army, the navy,
the chartered companies, the Church, the Law, it was bound to congeal into something that looks almost
like an estate; to surround itself in a cocoon of ideological apologetics; and to nourish a style of life, of
conspicuous-indeed, spectacular-consumption which is associated with a true aristocracy." Thompson,
"The Peculiarities of the English," in Thompson's The Poverty of Theory, Monthly Review Press, New York,
1978 (orig. 1965),pp. 258-59. For state banditry, see Thompson's later work, Whigs and Hunters, Pantheon,
New York, 1974, p. 2.94.
126. "In the westward trade in the first half of the eighteenth century was first of all sugar, and second of
all the slaves who made the sugar possible. Britain clearly dominated world commerce in sugar as of 1700,
but by 1750 primacy had passed to France." Wallerstein, The Modern World-System 11, op. cit., pp. 269-70.
127. See F. Nwabueze Okoye, "Chattel Slavery as the Nightmare of the American Revolutionaries,"
William and Mary Quarterly 37, no. 1 (January 1980): 3-28, for a most acute discussion of the paradoxes
that bemuddled American nationalists whose outrage "stemmed from their conviction that only black
people in America were deserving of servile status" (p. 3).
128. Monica Schuler, "Ethnic Slave Rebellions," op. cit., p. 379.
129. See Forrest Wood's Black Scare, op. cit.
130. John Nelson, a late eighteenth-century English Methodist preacher, recalled one of his nightmares:
"I dreamed I was in Yorkshire, going from Gomersal-Hill-Top to Cleckheaton; and about the middle of the
lane, I thought I saw Satan coming to meet me in the shape of a tall, black man, and the hair of his head like
snakes; . . . But I went on, ript open my clothes, and shewed him my naked breast, saying, 'See, here is the
blood of Christ.' Then I thought he fled from me as fast as a hare could run." Quoted by E. P. Thompson in
The Making of the English Working Class, Vintage, New York, 1966, p. 39.
131. Joshua Giddings, The Exiles ofFlorida, Follett, Foster and Co., Columbus, 1858, p. 2.
132. "Slave rebelliousness was a familiar reality in eighteenth-century America. This may explain why
most historians who have studied blacks in the colonial and Revolutionary periods have never been drawn
into the debate over the creation of docile Sambos that absorbed scholars of nineteenth-century slavery for
so long." Jeffrey J. Crow, "Slave Rebelliousness and Social Conflict in North Carolina, 1775-1802," William
and Mary Quarterly 37, no. 1 (January 1980): 80. See also Herbert Aptheker, American Negro Slave Revolts,
International Publishers, New York, 1964 (orig. 1943), p. 172, and his "Negro Slave Revolts in the United
States, 1526-1860:' in Aptheker, Essays in the History of the American Negro, International Publishers, New
York, 1945, p. 19, for the 1712 New York revolt; for the Stono uprising see Peter Wood, Black Majority,
Norton, New York, 1975.
133. Gerald (Michael) Mullin, Flight and Rebellion, Oxford University Press, New York, 1972, pp. 89-103.
Mullin's total is from study ofthe published advertisements of the period (1736-1801). ASsuch, the figure of
1,500 cannot be taken as any true accounting of the numbers of fugitives during this period. Several
historians of slavery, in quite different contexts, have indicated reasons for this: "Not all planters advertised
in local newspapers for runaways. An advertisement might set ruthless slave kidnappers on the trail." Leslie
Owens, op. cit., p. 87; "[Ulprisings appear to have been attempted or planned repeatedly by slaves. For
obvious reasons, published sources are irregular on these matters-the South Carolina Gazette refrained
from mentioning the Stono incident, which occurred within twenty miles of Charlestown." Peter Wood,
NOTES T O PAGES 140-41

361

op. cit., p. 298; and Herbert Aptheker noted, "The South Carolina Gazette, May 31,1760 remarked: 'Good
Reasons have been suggested to us, for not inserting in this Paper any Account of Insurrections, especially
at this time.' " Aptheker, American Negro Slave Revolts, op. cit., p. 197 n. 98.
134. "[Dluring precisely those two decades after 1695 when rice production took permanent hold in
South Carolina, the African portion of the population drew equal to, and then surpassed, the European
portion. Black inhabitants probably did not actually outnumber whites until roughly 1708. But whatever
the exact year in which a black majority was established, the development was unprecedented within
England's North American colonies and was fully acknowledged long before the English crown took
control of the proprietary settlement in 1720.'' Peter Wood, op. cit., p. 36. Elsewhere Wood commented:
"The thought that newcomers from Africa were the slaves most likely to rebel does not appear to have been
idle speculation, for the late 173os, a time of conspicuous unrest, was also a time of massive importation. In
fact, at no earlier or later date did recently arrived Africans (whom we might arbitrarily define as all those
slave immigrants who had been in the colony less than a decade) comprise such a large proportion of
South Carolina's Negro population. By 1740 the black inhabitants of the colony numbered roughly 39,000."
Ibid., pp. 301-2. See also Mary Frances Berry, Black Resistance/White Law, Appleton-Century-Croft, New
York, 1971, p. 3.
13s. Harvev Wish. "American Slave Insurrections Before 1861:' in William Chace and Peter Collier (eds.),
Justice Denied, Harcourt, Brace and World, New York, 1970, p. 84.
136. For the earlier revolts, see Aptheker's American Negro Slave Revolts, op. cit., pp. 173-74,182-91. For
the Spanish initiative in the i73os, see Wood, op. cit., pp. 306-7.
137. P. Wood, op. cit., p. 306.
138. Ibid., p. 308. See also Joshua Coffin, "An Account of Some ofthe Principal Slave Insurrections," in (no
author), Slave Insurrections, Selected Documents, Negro Universities Press, Westport, 1970 (orig. 1860),p. 14.
139. Ibid., pp. 308-9, pp. 322-23.
140. Aptheker, American Negro Slave Revolts, op, cit., pp. 195-96. Laurens was a wealthy Charleston
merchant.
141. See ibid., pp. 17-18. See also The Negro in Virginia, Virginia Writers' Project, Hastings House, New
York, pp. 174-87.
142. See "Punishment for a Negro Rebel," Documents, William and Mary Quarterly, ser. 1, vol. lo, no. 3
(January 1902):178.
143. Aptheker, American Negro Slave Revolts, op. cit., pp. 169-78; and The Negro in Virginia, op. cit., pp.
126-27,140-41.
144 Ibid., p. 179.
145. Allan Kulikoff, "The Origins of Afro-American Society in Tidewater Maryland and Virginia, 17001790," William and Mary Quarterly35, no. 2 (April 1978): 238-39.
146. Philip Curtin, The Atlantic Slave Trade, op, cit., p. 143.
147. See Mullin, op. cit., pp. 110-12, 129.
148. See Aptheker, American Negro Slave Revolts, op. cit., pp. 197,199-zoo.
149. The 1790 census figures are cited by Ira Berlin, Slaves Without Masters, Vintage, New York, 1974, p.
23.
150. Jack D. Foner, Blacks and the Military in American History, Praeger, New York, 1974, p. 8. Michael
Mullin writes: "George Washington warned that 'if the Virginians are wise, that arch traitor . . . Dunmore
should be instantly crushed, if it takes the force of the whole army to do it; otherwise like a snowball
rolling, his army will get size,' " Mullin, op. cit., p. 132.
151. Crow, op. cit., p. 83.
152. Aptheker, American Negro Slave Revolts, op. cit., pp. 19-20.
153. "British administrators and Virginia slaves had been well aware of one another throughout the
eighteenth century. As the Revolution approached it became increasingly evident to the slaves that the
British were white men with a significantly different view of slavery than their masters. Rumors of the
Somerset Case, for example, encouraged slaves from even the most remote areas to run away and attempt
to secure passage to England. (News of Lord Mansfield's decision, that in effect set free all Negroes brought
to England as slaves, reached the colony by the summer 1772.)" Mullin, op. cit., pp. 130-31.
154. Crow, op. cit., p. 89.
155. See Benjamin Quarles, The Negro in the American Revolution, University of North Carolina Press,
Chapel Hill, 1940, pp. 51-67; Winthrop Jordan, White Over Black, op. cit., pp. 302-3; Jack Foner, op. cit.,
pp. 3-19,264; and Sidney Kaplan, The Black Presence in the Era of the American Revolution, 1770-1800, New
York Graphic Society, Greenwich, 1973, p p 31-71.
156. See Benjamin Quarles, "Lord Dunmore as Liberator:' William and Mary Quarterly 15, no. 4 (October 1958): 494-507; and Jack Foner, op. cit., p. 15.
157. "The American Revolution brought some specific gains for blacks. Some slaves in fact obtained the
freedom promised in return for military service. However, not all slaves who fought for the patriot cause
were freed. In 1782 Virginia sold almost all the state-owned slaves in its navy. Blacks elsewhere had to resist
-<

361

NOTES TO PAGES 141 - 4 4

attempts by their masters to re-enslave them upon the expiration of their term enlistment. . . . Ironically, it
appears that more blacks obtained their freedom by serving with the British than with the patriots:' Foner,
op. cit., pp. 17-18.
158. Crow, op. cit., pp. 93-94. See also, Herbert Aptheker, "Maroons Within the Present Limits of the
United States," in Richard Price (ed.), Maroon Societies, op. cit., pp. 153-54.
159. See Aptheker, American Negro Slave Revolts, op. cit., pp. 106-7.
160. T. 0 . Ott, The Haitian Revolution, University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville, 1973, p. 4. "From about
the end of the Sixteenth to the end of the Seventeenth Century (1697) when, at the signing of the Treaty of
Ryswick, France acquired decisive control of the occidental part of Hispaniola, Haiti, the colony experienced what could be called a 'dark age.' " Alex Dupuy, "Spanish Colonialism and the Origin of Underdevelopment in Haiti:' Latin American Perspectives, iss. 9, vol. 3, no. 2 (Spring 1976): 27.
161. Ibid., p. 5; and T. Lothrop Stoddard, The French Revolution in Sun Domingo, Houghton Mifflin,
Boston, 1914, chapters 4 and 5.
162. Stoddard, op. cit., pp. 50-52; and David Nicholls, From Dessalines to Duvalier, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1979, pp. 19-24.
163. Norman Stone, "The Many Tragedies of Haiti," Times Literary Supplement, 15 February 1980, p. 161.
164. James, The Black Jacobins, Vintage, New York, 1963 (orig. 1938),p. 50.
165. The quote is from Stoddard, op. cit., p. 50.
166. Ibid., p. 51.
167. Ibid., p. 53.
168. Ibid., pp. 62-63.
169. Yvan Debbasch, "Le Maniel: Further Notes:' in Richard Price (ed.), Maroon Societies, op. cit., p. 145;
for other contributions on the maroons in the French Caribbean, see Gabriel Debien, "Marronage in the
French Caribbean," ibid., pp. 107-34; M. L. E. Moreau de Saint-Mery, "The Border Maroons of SaintDomingue: Le Maniel:' ibid., pp. 135-42; and Nicholls, op. cit., pp. 24,3i-32.
170. See David Nicholls, op. cit., pp. 24, 261-62; and Ott, op. cit., p. 18.
171. Nicholls, ibid.; James, op. cit., pp. 20-22.
172. For the "Swiss" see James, op. cit., pp. 98-100; and Ott, op. cit., pp. 51-52.
173. See David Nicholls, "A Work of Combat: Mulatto Historians and the Haitian Past, 1847-1867,"
Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 16, no. 1 (February 1974):15-38.
174. Nicholls, From Dessalines to Duvalier, op. cit., p. 31. Nicholls refers to J. Leyburn's The Haitian People
(1941), p. 15.
175. Ibid.
176. Stoddard writes: "[W]hen the first rumors reached France of the great negro insurrection of August,
1791, a retired officer of the marechaussee wrote an open letter to one of the daily papers, warning against
exaggeration. He thinks that the reports then current may be based upon some acute access of the chronic
marronage, and he gives a sketch of his own experiences which portrays a state of genuine guerrilla
warfare." Stoddard, op. cit., p. 64.
177. James, op. cit., p. 51. James was referring directly to the British historians who concerned themselves
especially with British abolition and whose work was specifically addressed by Eric Williams in his
Capitalism and Slavery, op. cit.
178. This summary of the earliest days of the Haitian Revolution was culled from Ott, op. cit., pp. 47R
and James, op. cit., pp. 85ff. The final quote is from Ott, op. cit., p. 51.
179. See James, passim.
180. Ibid., pp. 356-57.
181. See Jack D. L. Holmes, "The Abortive Slave Revolt at Pointe Coupee, Louisiana, 1795," Louisiana
History 11, no. 4 (Fdli970): 341-61.
182. Eugene Genovese, From Rebellion to Revolution, Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge, 1979,
PP. 95-96.
183. W. E. B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction, Atheneum, New York, 1962, p. 12.
184. See Robert Conrad, The Destruction of Brazilian Slavery, 1850-1888, University of California Press,
Berkeley, 1972, pp., 281-83; the original source of the figure is Agostinho Marques Perdigao Malheiro, A
escravidao no Brad, 1944.
185. See R. K. Kent, "African Revolt in Bahia: 24-25 January 1835:' Journal of Social History 3, no. 4
(Summer 1970): 335; and Conrad, op. cit., pp. 6-9.
186. Quoted by Conrad, op. cit., p. 13.
187. Ibid., p. 7.
188. Leslie Bethell, "The Independence of Brazil and the Abolition of the Brazilian Slave Trade: AngloBrazilian Relations, 1822-1826:' Latin American Studies 1, no. 2 (November 1969): 117. Joao Pandia Calogeras commented: "For three centuries slaves had constituted the only form of labor and had been the basis
of the material progress of Brazil. White labor . . . was almost non existent." A History of Brazil, University
of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 1959, p. 146.
N O T E S T O PAGES 1 4 4 - 5 0

363

189. Conrad, op. cit., p. 12.
190. Ibid., p. 13.
191. Curtin, The AtlanticSlave Trade, op. cit., p. 29.
192. Bethell, op. cit., pp. 117-18. For the eighteenth-century antecedents for the failure of Brazil's slave
population to reproduce, see C. R. Boxer, The Golden Age of Brazil, op. cit., pp. 173-75.
193. Bethell, op. cit., p. 118; and Craton, Sinews ofEmpire, op. cit., p. 244.
194. Conrad, op. cit., p. 4.
195. "As repression [of the slave trade by the British government] became stronger, the Brazilian flag
ceased to be used and was increasingly replaced by the Portuguese, Spanish, and finally the North American. The last instances of the trade were those of the schooner Mary E. Smith, apprehended in the port of
Sao Mateus, Espirito Santo, and the Vickery, both in 1855." Jose Honorio Rodrigues, Brazil and Africa,
University of California Press, Berkeley, 1965, p. 174. Rodrigues continues: "American capitalists, ship
builders in New York, Providence, Boston, Salem, and Portland, or Philadelphia and Baltimore, profited
greatly from the sale of their ships, built-and they knew it-for the trade and sold deliberately for voyages
to the coast of Africa" (p. 176).
196. For Britain's role in Brazilian independence, see Bethell, op. cit., passim. For the role of English
capital in the Brazilian slave trade, see Eric Williams, Capitalism and Slavery, op. cit., pp. 132, 172, 176;
Rodrigues, op. cit., pp. 165, 168, 181; Bethell, op. cit., pp. 121, 136; Conrad, op. cit., p. 14; and Alan K.
Manchester, British Pre-eminence in Brazil, Octagon Books, New York, 1964, p. 258 n. 23.
197. Eric Williams, Capitalism and Slavery, op. cit., p. 172. Williams reported: "Brazil took one-twentieth
of total British exports in 1821, one-twelfth in 1832; the exports increased two and half times." Ibid., p. 132.
198. Ibid., p. 176.
199. Manchester, op. cit., p. 258 n. 23.
zoo. In 1827, the Brazilian legislator Cunha Matos had observed: "England aspires to dominate all of
Asia, as by means of the settlements and wars that it is undertaking in Africa one must suppose it also
aspires to complete dominion over that great region. The countries of both regions have the same commodities and products as Brazil, and as the British must prefer their own territories, they will seek by all
means to set up obstacles for us; and to achieve this there is no better way than to deprive Brazil of
additional labor: this is the true British policy. I believe with all my heart that Brazil will come to receive
cotton and rice from Benguela, wax from China, and sugar from Tonkin: if this does not occur in my time,
it will happen in my children's time, who will perhaps remember my prophecy." Quoted by Jose Rodrigues,
op. cit., pp. 154-55. Lawrence F. Hill reported: "Some Yankee critics vowed that the British were more
interested in securing for British merchants a monopoly of the African trade than in the welfare of the
negroes. This was the explanation for the British refusal to destroy the factories along the African coast
where all the supplies used in the purchase and transportation of the slaves were stored, for the goods; it
was the explanation of the numerous treaties, which were largely of a commercial nature, negotiated by the
London government with the African chiefs; it supported the allegation that the British cruisers more
frequently made prizes of the slavers after the negroes had been taken on board than before. Other critics
attacked the British practice which permitted the negroes liberated by the courts to be bound out to British
planters in Guiana and the West Indies for periods of three to seven years. It was hard to see how this
system of apprenticeship, which was occasionally extended to three consecutive terms, differed from
outright slavery." Hill, "The Abolition of the African Slave Trade to Brazil," Hispanic American Historical
Review 11, no. 2 (May 1931): 196-97.
201. Cited by Kent, "African Revolt in Bahia," op. cit., p. 335. See also Conrad, op. cit., p. 283; and J. V. D.
Saunders, "The Brazilian Negro," The Americas 15, no. 3 (January 1959):271.
202. Kent, ibid., p. 339. Recall, though, that the "Angolas," peoples recruited from an area bounded by the
Zaire (Congo) river in the north, the Atlantic on the west, the Dande river on the south and the Kvango on
the east, had been responsible for some of the major quilombos of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
Boxer had identified: "The bulk of the slaves classified as 'Minas' were evidently of the Yoruba linguistic
group, being Nagos and Geges; but the term also included the Twi-speaking Fanti-Ashanti from further
west and the Calabar or Yefik from further east." The Golden Age of Brazil, op. cit., p. 176. Kent maintains
that "Nago is known to have been the lingua geral of Bahian Africans from the turn of the century until the
1860swhen it lost out to Brazilian Portuguese." Kent, "African Revolt in Bahia," op. cit., p. 339.
203. Stuart Schwartz "The Mocambo: Slave Resistance in Colonial Bahia," op. cit., p. 333.
204. Writing in the mid-i96os, Jose Rodrigues appears to have confused Brazilian lore and reality:
"Despite the variety of tribes represented in Brazil, the Bantus were always preferred because they were less
independent, more submissive, more reserved in behavior and loquacious in speech, and more adaptable.
They accepted the religion, Christianity, and the social forms imposed upon them. The most characteristic
Bantu type was the Angolan. Taller than other Negroes, less robust, they were communicative, talkative,
and cordial. Less conformable were the Dahomeyan tribes (Jejes), the most important of which was the
Nago, and the Mohammedans, who came mostly from northern Nigeria and were called Males. The least
submissive Negroes in Brazil were the Hausas." Rodrigues, op. cit., pp. 44-45.
364

NOTES TO PAGES 1 5 1 - 5 3

205. Calogeras, op. cit., p. 156.
206. Rollie Poppino, Brazil, the Land and People, Oxford University Press, New York, 1968, p. 167.
207. Kent, "African Revolt in Bahia," op. cit., p. 340.
208. Jose Rodrigues, op. cit., p. 45. Rodrigues, as we shall see shortly, was not entirely accurate. Hausas
had participated in only some of these movements.
209. Kent, "African Revolt in Bahia," op. cit., p. 343.
210. Artur Ramos, op. cit., p. 47. For more on African women in Brazil, see Mary Karasch, "Black Worlds
in the Tropics: Gilberto Freyre and the Women of Color in Brazil:' Proceedings of the Pacijc Coast Council
on Latin American Studies3 (1974): 19-29.
211. Ramos, op. cit., p. 48.
212. Ibid., p. 44.
213. Kent, "African Revolt in Bahia," op. cit., pp. 351-52.
214. Ibid., p. 355.
215. Ibid., p. 356.
216. Ramos seems to have mistakenly identified the Yoruba's Obgoni society with the Hausa: "It is
important to recall that in the planning of the Negro revolts, the secret Hausa societies, called Obgoni or
Ohogobo, played a most significant role." Ramos, op. cit., p. 46.
217. Quoted by Kent, "African Revolt in Bahia," op. cit., p. 344.
218. "In 1747, precisely the year when Beckford called sugar the wheat of the Caribbean, a Prussian
chemist, Marggraf, in a communication to the Royal Academy of Science and Literature in Berlin, showed
that various kinds of beetroot, the sweet taste of which was already known, contained sugar that could be
extracted and crystallized in a fairly simple way. Where the Welsers and the Elector of Brandenburg-Prussia
had failed in the attempt to gain for Germany a place in the Caribbean sun, beet sugar indicated that that
place was after all unnecessary." Eric Williams, From Columbus to Castro, op. cit., p. 135. Williams also
notes: "Thomas Jefferson, in his turn, in 1790, looked to maple sugar, produced by child labour, as a
substitute for slave-grown cane." Ibid., pp. q4-35. In France, after the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars,
and the loss of her most important sugar colonies, the sugar-beet industry successfully substituted for
cane. See W. 0.Henderson, The Industrial Revolution in Europe, op. cit., pp. gl,96-97; and Eric Williams,
Capitalism and Slavery, op. cit., pp. 145-49.
219. Williams, Capitalism and Slavery, op. cit., p. 149.
220. Ibid., pp. 150-51.
221. Williams, From Columbus to Castro, op. cit., p. 305; and Craton, Sinews ofEmpire, op. cit., p. 244.
222. "In fact, no less than 22,000 slaves were shipped between British West Indian colonies more or less
legally between 1808 and 1830." Craton, ibid., p. 271.
223. Ibid., p. 282.
224. Craton, "Proto-Peasant Revolts?," op. cit., p. 109; and Williams, Capitalism and Slavery, op. cit., p.
54.
225. B. W. Higman, "Slavery Remembered: The Celebration of Emancipation in Jamaica," Journal of
Caribbean History12 (1979): 55-56; and Curtin, The Atlantic Slave Trade, op. cit., pp. 52-59.
226. Craton, "Proto-Peasant Revolts?," op. cit., p. 109 n. 30.
227. Mary Reckord, "The Jamaican Slave Rebellion of 1831," Past and Present, 40, July 1968, p. 108.
228. Craton, Sinews of Empire, op. cit., p. 201; see also Williams, Capitalism and Slavery, op. cit., pp. 8687.
229. Williams, ibid., pp. 87-91.
230. Craton, Sinews ofEmpire, op. cit., pp. 201-2 and pp. 205-6.
231. Ibid., p. 201.
232. Williams, Capitalism and Slavery, op. cit., pp. 1345-46, 142-43. C. L. R. James, much earlier, had
recognized the same transfer of allegiance: "The British found that by the abolition of the mercantile
system with America, they gained instead of losing. It was the first great lesson in the advantages of free
trade. But if Britain gained, the British West Indies suffered. The rising industrial bourgeoisie, feeling its
way to free trade and a greater exploitation of India, began to abuse the West Indies, called them 'sterile
rocks,' and asked if the interest and independence of the nation should be sacrificed to 72,000 masters and
400,000 slaves." The Black Jacobins, op. cit., pp. 51-52.
233. Craton, Sinews of Empire, op. cit., p. 270.
234. Ibid., pp. 270-71.
235. Craton, "Proto-Peasant Revolts?," op. cit., pp. 101-2.
236. Private letters published under "Negro Insurrection," London Times, 5 June 1816.
237. Craton, "Proto-Peasant Revolts?,"op. cit., p. 117.
238. Kopytoff, "The Early Political Development of Jamaican Maroon Societies:' op. cit., p. 300.
239. Craton, "Proto-Peasant Revolts?:' op. cit., p. 105 n. 23.
240. Williams, From Columbus to Castro, op. cit., pp. 304-6.
241. "In his speech in the House on 15 April 1831 [Thomas Fowell] Buxton made a telling comparison
NOTES TO PAGES 1 5 3 - 6 0

365

between the continuing decline of the slave population as against the increase of the free blacks. He pointed
out that in the past ten years the number of slaves in the West Indian colonies, excluding manumissions,
had decreased by 45,800. The free Negroes of Haiti had, on the other hand, increased by about 500,000 or
more than doubled in 20 years." Richard Hart, Slaves Who Abolished Slavery, op. cit., 1:221.
242. See Review, Proceedings of a General Court Martial held at the Colony House in George Town on
Monday the ~ t Day
h of October 1823, Edinburgh Review, xl, LXXXIX (March 1824): 244-45, 250-53. Also
cited by Craton, "Proto-Peasant Revolts?," op. cit., p. 105, n. 23.
243. Craton, ibid., p. 106. For Smith's death see Proceedings of Court Martial, op. cit., pp. 268ff.
244. "[Tlhe general response in Parliament was shock at the rebellion of the Demerara slaves, which
seemed to come in response to amelioration measures and to occur on what were regarded as the most
benevolently ruled estates." Ibid., p. 109. Omissions in the official report on the rebellion played no small
part in orchestrating public opinion; see Proceedings of Court Martial, op. cit., pp. 258-59.
245. Slave Rebellion Trials: Jamaica, 1182, Public Records Office, Colonial Office (C.O.) 1371185.
246. Mary Reckord believes a number of the instances in the evidence given during the trials "cast grave
doubt on the official figure for slaves killed in the rebellion." Reckord, op. cit., p. 121. She is inclined,
apparently, toward a higher figure. William Law Mathieson, earlier, had put the figure at "about 400,"
Mathieson, British Slavery and Its Abolition, Longmans, Green and Co., London, 1926, p. 214. Burn agreed
with Mathieson's figure. W. L. Burn, Emancipation and Apprenticeship in the British West Indies, Jonathan
Cape, London, 1937, p. 94.
247. For Henry Bleby, see his Death Struggles ofslavery, William Nichols, London, 1853.
248. Reckord, op. cit., p. 120.
249. Craton, "Proto-Peasant Revolts?," op. cit., p. 114. Mathieson observed: "Not many of the whites lost
their lives in this conflict-ten killed, two murdered, and one or two burned in houses. When we consider
that some fifty thousand slaves had broken loose, acts of cruelty or ill-usage were extremely rare; and there
was no truth, or very little, in the stories of the violation of women." Mathieson, op. cit., p. 214. For Jamaica
in an earlier period, Patterson had written: "The inflammatory thought of white women being raped by
rebelling black slaves seeking racial vengeance rarely spurred men on to gallant deeds. Indeed, there is not
one recorded case of rape during the revolts, though several white women were killed." Patterson, "Slavery
and Slave Revolts: A Sociohistorical Analysis of the First Maroon War, 1665-1740," op. cit., p. 286. For
Brazil, Kent and Schwartz made similar observations, see Kent, "Palmares: An African State in Brazil," op.
cit., p. 170; and Schwartz, "The Mocambo: Slave Resistance in Colonial Bahia," op. cit., p. 328.
250. Patterson, The Sociology of Slavery, op. cit., pp. 282,276.
251. Reckord, op. cit., pp. 113,117ff.
252. Ibid., pp. iog-i3,124-25.
253. The elite thesis is Craton's reconsideration of his earlier argument in Sinews of Empire; Craton,
"Proto-Peasant Revolts?," op. cit. pp. 116-25. The situational factors are among those named by Patterson
in his The Sociology of Slavery, op. cit., pp. 274-79.
254. Reckord, op. cit., p. 113; and Bleby, op. cit., pp. 125-30. Mavis Campbell argues: "Many of the whites,
it was later discovered, had actively encouraged the slaves to believe that they had received their freedom."
Campbell, The Dynamics of Change in a Slave Society, Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, Rutherford,
1976, p. 171. James Stephen, the Colonial Officelawyer, had made similar remarks, declaring in a Memorandum of 22 March 1832, that "the charge of having fomented discontent among the slaves by a series of
wilful, systematic and public misrepresentation of the designs of the English Government, by a course of
agitation pursued in defiance of the most evident danger, and by the concealment from the authorities of
the indications of the approaching calamity is preferred on grounds which it seems impossible to controvert." Quoted by W. L. Burn, op cit., p. 92.
255 Bleby, op. cit., p. 127.
256. W. L. Burn, op. cit., p. 93.
257. Reckord, op. cit., p. 114.
258. Ibid., p. 112.
259. c . 0 . 1371185, v.i., 467.
260. Roger Norman Buckley, Slaves in Red Coats, Yale University Press, New Haven, 1979, p p 130-43;
Bleby, op. cit., p. lo.
261. Reckord, op. cit., p. 117; Bleby, ibid., pp. 13-15.
262. Ibid., p. 118. After the rebellion's end, marronage appears to have increased, see Bleby, ibid., p. 102.
263. C.O. 1371185, v.i., 540.
264. Patterson uses the lower figure; The Sociology of Slavery, op. cit., p. 273. Craton employs the larger
figure; "Proto-Peasant Revolts?," op. cit., p. 110.
265. Reckord, op. cit., p. 119. She also notes: "An independent conspiracy was formed among the head
people on a small group of estates in Portland, and slaves from estates in St. Thomas in the East near
Manchioneal planned to abscond to the bush where they built a hideout village:' Ibid., p. 109 n. 3.

366 NOTES T O PAGES 160-64

Mathieson also notes: "A sort of city of refuge was subsequently discovered in the deepest recesses of the
woods, consisting of twenty-one houses, 'completely ready for occupation.'" Op. cit., p. 212 n. I.
266. Craton, "Proto-Peasant Revolts?," op. cit., p. 110.
267. C.O. ~71185,v.i., 618.
268. "The event which made further postponement of the emancipation issue impossible was the
rebellion raging in western Jamaica from the end of December 1831 which was finally suppressed at the
beginning ofApril 1832. Destroying property worth well over a million pounds and coming as it did on the
heels of numerous other revolts and conspiracies in other sugar colonies during the previous decade, the
Jamaican rebellion was a sure indication that if slavery was not soon abolished from above it would be
destroyed from below." Richard Hart, op. cit., p. 223. Reckord argues that the brutal repression laid slavery
low: Reckord, op. cit., pp. 124-25.
269. Hart, ibid., and for the 1832 Reform Bill, see E. P. Thompson, The Making of the English Working
Class, op. cit., pp. 807-12,818-19; and Izhak Gross, "The Abolition of Negro Slavery and British Parliamentary Politics, 1832-33:' Historical Journal 23, no. 1 (1980): 65-66,79-85.
270. Reckord, op. cit., p. 125.
271. W. E. B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction in America, 1860-1880, Meridian, New York 1962 (orig. igjg),
ch. 4; and Robert Conrad, op. cit., pp. 184-86,267-70.
272. Craton, "The Passion to Exist: Slave Rebellions in the British West Indies 1650-1832:) Journal of
Caribbean History13 (1980):19.
273. Perhaps the more familiar employment of Gramsci's notion of hegemony as applied to slavery is
that of Eugene Genovese in his Roll, Jordan, Roll, op. cit. Genovese's treatment of North American
plantation slavery as an instance where the master class achieved "command of the culture" (p. 658) has
been effectively challenged by Herbert Gutman in The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom, 17j0-19zj
Pantheon, New York, 1976, chap. 2, and Lawrence Levine, Black Culture and Black Consciousness, Oxford
University Press, New York, 1977. Alan Dawley has observed: "If the idea of hegemony cannot be reduced to
its ideological or cultural elements alone, might there also be something wrong in Genovese's attempt to
appropriate it to explainthe rule of slavemasters in terms of 'command of the culture?' During the long
history of slavery in North America, the rule of the big planters was maintained through property: first in
land, with ownership and inheritance confined to freemen, and second, in the bondsmen themselves, who
were chattel, freely bought and sold. . . . Subjugated by race as well as relegated to economic dependency,
they could scarcely reach out to ally with poor whites. On top of this they were subject to the lash, the
patroller, the brace, the coffle. The masters had gotten along on these terms for 150 years before paternalism
flowered on the plantation. Are we to believe that for the generation born after 1830 these severe authoritarian and economic modes of domination disappeared? On the contrary, plantation slavery is the last place
to look for a North American example of a hegemonic culture as the basis for class rule." Dawley, "E. P.
Thompson and the Peculiarities of the Americans," Radical History Review 19 (Winter 1978-79): 49-50.
274. C. L. R. James and George Padmore, "Revolts in Africa," in The Future in the Present, Lawrence Hill,
Westport, 1977, p. 79. Much of this essay-as well as the quoted observations-first appeared in C. L. R.
James, A History of Negro Revolt (1938), subsequently published as A History of Pan-African Revolt, Drum
and Spear, Washington, D.C., 1969, pp. 58-59. Similar observations have been alluded to here: see Proceedings of Court Martial, op. cit., pp. 258-59; and Bleby, op. cit., passim.
275. Bernard Magubane, "A Critical Look at Indices Used in the Study of Social Change in Colonial
Africa," Current Anthropology 12, nos. 4-5 (October-December 1971): 420. See also in the same issue the
replies to Magubane and his own concluding comments.
276. Lucy Mair, "Anthropology and Colonial Policy," African Affairs, April 1975, p. 194. For more on
British social anthropology and colonial administration, see David Goddard (ed.), Ideology in Social
Science, Vintage, New York, 1973, pp. 61-75; and the articles by Evans-Pritchard, Mary Douglas, Edmund
Leach, Lucy Mair, and Rodney Needham in the Times Literary Supplement, 6 July 1973; also see Wendy
James, "The Anthropologist as Reluctant Imperialist:' Stephen Feuchtwang, "The Discipline and Its Sponsors," and Abdel Ghaffar M. Ahmed, "Some Remarks from the Third World on Anthropology and
Colonialism," all in Talal Asad (ed.), Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter, Humanities, New York, 1973,
esp. Feuchtwang.
277. Mair, ibid., p. 192.
278. Ibid., p. 191.
279. Magubane, op. cit., p. 440.
280. James and Padmore, op. cit., p. 70; see also George Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism,
Doubleday, New York, 1972.
281. See Bonnie Keller, "Millenarianism and Resistance: the Xhosa Cattle Killing:' Journal of Asian and
African Studies 13, nos. 1-2 (JanuaryIApril 1978): 94-111. The narrative of the "evens" begins with the
visions seen by a young Xhosa girl, Nongqause, her uncle, the diviner Mhlakaza, and others: "The means
for ensuring the arrival of the golden age were surely among the most drastic that had ever been asked of

NOTES T O PAGES 1 6 4 - 6 5

367

any people. Total herds of cattle, their most precious possession which symbolized to the Xhosa the
continuity, vitality, and wealth of patrilineal kin groups, were to be completely destroyed. The reluctant
were assured that destruction of the living herds mattered little since they, and all their ancestors, would
return to repopulate the earth. Believers were told to consume all the corn in their storage pits, for on the
morning of renewal they would find the pits refilled. The Xhosa were not to cultivate the fields and should
sacrifice all poultry and other small stock" (p. 105). See also Edward Roux, Time Longer Than Rope,
University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1964, pp. 32-44; Elias Canetti, Crowds and Power, Viking Press,
New York, 1966, pp. 193-200; and also 1. B. Peires, "Nxele, Ntsidana and the Origins of the Xhosa Religious
Reaction," Journal ofAfrican History 20, no. 1 (1979): 51-61.
282. See David Clammer, TheZulu War, St. Martin's, New York, 1973. G. H. L. Le May, Black and White in
South Africa, American Heritage Press, 1971; Roux, op. cit., pp. 45-53, 87-100; C. L. R. James, A History of
Pan-African Revolt, op. cit., pp. 6371; James Stuart, A History of the Zulu Rebellion, Macmillan, London,
1913; George Shopperson and Thomas Price, Independent African, Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh,
1958, pp. 419% Shula Marks, "The Zulu Disturbances in Natal:' in Robert Rotberg (ed.), Rebellion in Black
Africa, Oxford University Press, London, 1971, pp. 24-59.
283. Gerald Bender, Angola Under the Portuguese, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1978, p. 138;
Ronald Chilcote, EmergingNationalisrn in Portuguese Africa, Hoover Institution, Stanford, 1969.
284. Basil Davidson, The African Past, Little, Brown, Boston, 1964, pp. 357-58.
285. See Ivor Wilks, Asante in the Nineteenth Century, Cambridge University Press, London, 1975; David
Kimble, A Political History of Ghana: The Rise of Gold Coast Nationalism, 1850-1928, Oxford University
Press, London, 1963; R. H. Kofi Darkwah, Shewn, Menilek and the Ethiopian Empire, 1813-1889, Heinemann, London, 1975; Harold Marcus, The Life and Times of Menelik 11, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1975;
Obaro Ikime, "Colonial Conquest and African Resistance in the Niger Delta States," Tarikh 4, no. 3 (1973):
1-13; J. A. Atanda, "British Rule in Buganda," Tarikh 4, no. 4 (1974): 37-54; Elizabeth Hopkins, "The
Nyabingi Cult of Southwestern Uganda:' in R. Rotberg (ed.), Rebellion in Black Africa, op. cit., pp. 60-132;
Ian Clegg, Workers' Self-Management in Algeria, Monthly Review Press, New York, 1971; T. 0. Ranger,
Revolt in Southern Rhodesia, 1896-7, Heinemann, London, 1967; D. N. Beach, " 'Chimurenga': The Shona
Rising of 1896-97," Journal ofAfrican History 20, no. 3 (1979):395-420; Michael Adas, Prophets ofRebellion:
Millenarian Protest Movements against the European Colonial Order, University of North Carolina Press,
Chapel Hill, 1979; and Terence Ranger, "The People in African Resistance: A Review," Journal of Southern
African Studies 4, no. 1 (October 1977):125-46, for a sample of the literature on African resistance.
286. T. 0 . Ranger, Revolt in Southern Rhodesia, op. cit., p. 352.
287. Michael Taussig, "Black Religion and Resistance in Colombia: Three Centuries of Social Struggle in
the Cauca Valley," Marxist Perspectives 2, no. 2 (Summer 1979): 88-89.

Chapter Seven
I. "Atrocities by rebellious slaves in the United States did not occur often. Rebels killed whites but rarely
tortured or mutilated them. They rarely, that is, committed against whites the outrages that whites
regularly committed against them. Elsewhere in the hemisphere, where maroon wars and large-scale
rebellions encouraged harsh actions, reactions, and reprisals, the level of violence and atrocity rose. But
everywhere the overwhelming burden of evidence convicts the slaveholding regimes of countless crimes,
including the most sadistic tortures, to every single act of barbarism by the slaves." Eugene Genovese, From
Rebellion to Revolution, op. cit., p. log.
2. Two observations by Henry Bleby during his investigation of the Jamaican rebellion in 1831 are quite
typical: "The hired advocate of slavery, Mr. Bortwick, in his lectures of 1833, which were designed to defend
and uphold the system, and cover or misrepresent its cruelties and oppressions, laid much stress on the
murders, rapes, and other outrages, said to have been committed by the slaves in Jamaica during the
insurrection; and the people of Great Britain were triumphantly referred to these as examples of what
might be looked for from them in the event of their emancipation. But very few instances of such
barbarities were ever brought before the public properly authenticated." And elsewhere: "I confess I have
always regarded it as a singular feature in the history of that period, that so few instances occurred of
cruelty practiced towards the whites, whether males or females, who at different times fell into the hands of
the blacks. Fifty thousand slaves were, probably, more or less concerned in the insurrection; and amongst
these, it may be, twenty-certainly not more-were directly accessory to such acts of atrocity as those
which we have described." Bleby, op. cit., pp. 43 and 47, respectively.
3. Returning to the Jamaican rebellion of 1831 and the earlier (1816) Barbados revolt, we are reminded of
Michael Craton's description of the repressions that followed. Of Barbados, he wrote: "Roaming slaves
were shot on sight and Negro houses burned. . . . Captives were commonly tortured. . . . Convicted rebels
were publicly executed in different parts of the island and their bodies-sometimes just their heads-in
many cases exposed on their home estates" (p. 102). Things went similarly in Jamaica 15 years later: "Many
slaves, including women and children were shot on sight, slave huts and provisions grounds were systemat-

368 NOTES TO PAGES 1 6 5 - 6 8

ically burned, and there were numerous judicial murders by summary court martial" (p. no). Craton,
"Proto-Peasant Revolts?," op. cit. The literature of slave resistance and repression abounds in such cruelty.
For the English public's reaction, see Bernard Semmel, Jamaican Blood and Victorian Conscience, Houghton Mifflin, Cambridge, 1963.
4. Edmund S. Morgan, American Slavery, American Freedom, op. cit., p. 309.
5. Ibid.
6. See George Shepperson and Thomas Price, Independent African, op. cit., pp. 272-73, 296-97.
7. C. L. R. James, The Black Jacobins, op. cit., p. 256; see also Genovese, From Rebellion to Revolution, op.
cit., pp. 109-10.
8. Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth, Grove, New York, 1963.
9. Genovese, From Rebellion to Revolution, op. cit., pp. 9-11. Much of Genovese's argument (chap. 3)
rests on the ideology of Toussaint L'Ouverture. Toussaint, however, was neither the initiator, the organizer,
nor the ultimate and dominant ideologue of the slave revolutionaries or the colored revolutionists (see
David Nicholls, From Dessalines to Duvalier, op. cit., pp. 11, 171). And if it is true that Toussaint had
achieved the status of a slaveowner himself before the revolution (David Geggus, "Haitian Divorce":
review, Times Literary Supplement, 5 December 1980), this provides a part of the basis for his attraction to
French revolutionary bourgeois ideology (see James, The Black Jacobins, op. cit., pp. 91-93). In the present
century, Amilcar Cabral has come closest to developing a comprehension of this phenomenon: see Cedric
J. Robinson, "Amilcar Cabral and the Dialectic of Portuguese Colonialism," Radical America 15, no. 3
(MayIJune 1981): 39-57.
lo. "Lawrence Vambe's two volumes of reminiscences [FromRhodesia to Zimbabwe, 19761, dedicated as
they are 'To all of my fellow men who died in the cause of Freedom' . . . [draw] on his own memories of life
in Chishawasha village when he was a child there in the 1920s to depict a society dominated by recollections
of the resistances. . . . He describes how the men of the village would regularly discuss their memories of
1896 whenever a serious general problem confronted the village. . . . The risings of 1896, and the tragic
readiness of all too many of the people to lose heart and go over to the enemy, form themes of Shona
poetry." T. 0 . Ranger, "The People in African Resistance," op. cit., pp. 126-27.
11. Mullin, Flight and Rebellion, op. cit., p. 42.
12. Ibid., p. 18.
13. "The African [who] don't eat salt, they say they [be] come like a witch. . .those Africans who don't eat
salt-and they interpret all things. And why you hear they say they fly away [it is because] they couldn't
stand the work when the taskmaster then flog them; and they get up and they just sing their language, and
they clapping their hands-so-and
they just stretch out, and them gone-so-right back. And they never
come back: Ishmael Webster. My grandmother had a grand aunt seventeen years old, and one day she in
the kitchen, and she blew on her hand-toot, toot-and she disappear. She didn't eat salt and she went back
to Africa: Elizabeth Spence." Monica Schuler, 'Was, Alas, Kongo," op. cit., p. 93.
14. Vittorio Lanternari, The Religions of the Oppressed, New American Library, New York, 1965; for
charisma, see Cedric J. Robinson, The Terms of Order, State University of New York, 1980, pp. 152-59.
15. C. L. R. James, TheBlackJacobins,op. cit., pp. 20-21,108-9.
16. Mullin, Flight and Rebellion, op. cit., p. 159.
17. Ibid., p. 160; see also the discussion of religion and resistance in Olli Alho, The Religron of the Slaves,
Finnish Academy of Science and Letters, Helsinki, 1976, pp. 224-34.
18. Amos Tutuola, My Life in the Bush of the Ghosts, Faber and Faber, London, 1954.

Chapter Eight
1. Eugene Genovese, "The Legacy of Slavery and the Roots of Black Nationalism," in Edward Greer (ed.),
Black Liberation Politics: A Reader, Allyn and Bacon, Boston, 1971, p. 43. According to George Rawick,
Genovese was a member of the American Communist Party in his youth. Interview with Rawick, winter
1976. The original of Genovese's article appeared in Studies on the Left (6, no. 6 [November-December
19661). In the same issue, Herbert Aptheker, one of the leading intellectuals in the American Communist
Party and a major contributor to Black history, took Genovese to task, insisting that he recall that "the
white radical historians followed and learned from Negro historians" and that: "There is no 'legend of
armed black resistance to slavery.' It is not a legend-though the use of the word 'armed' is disarming.
There is the fact of Negro resistance to enslavement-armed and unarmed, that is the great fact and it is not
legendary at all." Greer, ibid., pp. 65-66. Genovese has subsequently rehabilitated himself in part (Genovese, 1974 and 1979) but his theoretical presumptions still remain suspect. See James D. Anderson, "Aunt
Jemima in Dialectics: Genovese and Slave Culture," Journal of Negro History 61 (January 1976): 99-114;
Edward Royce, "Genovese on Slave Revolts and Weiner on the Postbellum South," Insurgent Sociologist 10
(Fall 1980): 109-17; and David Gerber, "Can You Keep 'Em Down on the Plantation after They've Read
Rousseau:' Radical America 15, no. 6 (November-December 1981): 47-56.
NOTES T O PAGES 1 6 8 - 7 6

369

2. See Fernand Braudel, The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II, Harper
and Row, New York, 1 9 7 6 , vols.
~
3. See Isaac Deutscher's comments on Leon Trotsky's "On Optimism and Pessimism, the Twentieth
Century, and Other Things," in his The Prophet Armed: Trotsky 1879-1921, Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1979, PP. 53-54.
4. C. L. R. James, Beyond a Boundary, Hutchinson, London, 1963, p. 43.
5. For the global dimensions of the imperialist impulses of Europe's ruling classes, see E. i.Hobsbawm,
Industry and Empire, Harmondsworth Penguin, 1968; and Michael Barrett Brown, The Economics of
Imperialism, Harmondsworth Penguin, 1974. Hobsbawm observes: "[Wlith certain exceptions, capitalism
was only beginning to seize hold of the underdeveloped world from the middle of the nineteenth century
on, and to engage in intensive capitalist investment there. Very little of the world was actually colonized,
occupied and ruled from abroad, the major exceptions being India and what today is Indonesia. . . . In
world history this era, stretching from the defeat of Napoleon to the eighteen-seventies, perhaps to the end
of the century if you like, may be described as the age of British power. . . . At all events, the moment when
world capitalism was entirely successful, confident and secure, was comparatively brief, the mid-Victorian
period, which may possibly be prolonged towards the end of the nineteenth century." "The Crisis of
Capitalism in Historical Perspective," Socialist Revolution 30 (October-December 1976):81. For the part of
Africa in this process, see George Padmore, Africa and World Peace, Frank Cass, London, 1972 (original
1937); and R. E. Robinson and J. A. Gallagher (with Alice Denny), Africa and the Victorians, Macmillan,
London, 1961.
6. M. Perham, "British Native Administration:' in Oxford University Summer School on Colonial Administration, Second Session, z7lune-8 July 1938, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1938, p. 50.
7. Oliver C. Cox, Caste, Class and Race, Modern Reader, New York, 1970 (original 1948), p. 360. See also
George Beckford, Persistent Poverty, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1972, pp. 39ff and 71ff.
8. For instances, see Wendell Bell, "Inequality in Independent Jamaica: A Preliminary Appraisal of Elite
Performance," Revista/Review Interamericana (Summer 1977): 294-308; Carl Stone, Class, Race and Political Behavior in Urban Jamaica, University of the West Indies, Mona, 1973; C. L. R. James, "The West Indian
Middle Classes," in Spheres of Existence, Allison and Busby, London, 1980, pp. 131-40, and his Tne Black
lacobins, Vintage, New York, 1963, pp. 36-44; Nell Painter, Exodusters, Alfred Knopf, New York, 1976, pp.
igff, 40ff; and David Nicholls, From Dessalines to Duvalier, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1979.
9. For examples, see J.-L. Miege, "The Colonial Past in the Present," and Rita Cruise-O'Brien, "Factors of
Dependence:' in W. H. Morris-Jones and George Fischer (eds.), Decolonisation and After, Frank Cass,
London, 1980, pp. 43-44 and 283-309, respectively; Ian Scott, "Middle Class Politics in Zambia," African
Affairs 77, no. 308 (July 1978): 321-34; Lillian Sanderson, "Education and Administrative Control in
Colonial Sudan and Northern Nigeria," African Affairs 74, no. 297 (October 1975): 433; Cedric J. Robinson,
"Amilcar Cabral and the Dialectic of Portuguese Colonialism:' Radical America, May-June 1981, pp. 39-57;
Ras Makonnen, Pan-Africanism from Within, Kenneth King (ed.), Oxford University Press, London, 1973,
pp. 126-27; and C. L. R. James, "The West Indian Middle Classes," op. cit.
lo. One inventory of the illegitimate or "shady" means by which Blacks have accumulated wealth is to be
found in E. Franklin Frazier, The Black Bourgeoisie, Free Press, Glencoe, 1957; and his "Human, All Too
Human: The Negro's Vested Interest in Segregation," Survey Graphic, January 1947, pp. 79-81.
11. See George Shepperson and Tom Price, Independent African, Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh,
1958, P P 242-55, 422-37.
12. This seems to have held true for even Black missionaries. Writing of Alexander Crummell, a prorninent Afro-American missionary active in Liberia in the third quarter of the nineteenth Century, Wilson
Moses observes: "For Crummell, as for most people afflicted with Anglophilism, English speaking culture
was a perfectly adequate synonym for civilization. The English language was self-evidently superior, he felt,
to any of the indigenous tongues of West Africa. On at least two occasions Crummell was ready to point out
that 'among the other providential events the fact that the exile of our fathers from their African homes to
America, had given us, their children, at least this one item of compensation, namely, the possession of the
Anglo-Saxon tongue . . . and that it was impossible to estimate too highly, the prerogatives and the
elevation the Almighty has bestowed upon us, in our having as our own, the speech of Chaucer and
Shakespeare, of Milton and Wordsworth, of Bacon and Burke, of Franklin and Webster.' " Moses, The
Golden Age of Black Nationalism, 1850-1925, Archon, Hamden, 1978, p. 66.
13. A. Victor Murray, "Missions and Indirect Administration," in Oxford University Summer School on
Colonial Administration, op. cit., p. 53.
14. Arthur Mayhew, "Education in the Colonies," ibid., pp. 84-85.
15. Penelope Hetherington, British Paternalism and Africa, 1920-40, Frank Cass, London, 1978, p. 111.
16. Lucy Mair, Native Policies in Africa, George Routledge, London, 1936, pp. 168-69.
17. Owen Clough (ed.), Report on African Affairs for the Year 1933, Empire Parliamentary Association,
Billings and Sons, Guildford, 1933, p. 15. "During the period of colonialism, policies were implemented,
particularly in the period between 1920 and 1950, drawing a small segment of the African population into
370

NOTES TO PAGES 177-80

the non-African orbit. Efforts were particularly made to train a cadre of doctors, lawyers, journalists,
religious leaders and intellectuals such as teachers and university staff." Peter Gutkind, "The Emergent
African Urban Proletariat," Occasional Paper Series, no. 8, Center for Developing Area Studies, McGill
University, Montreal, February 1974, p. 55.
18. Elliot Skinner, "The Persistence of Psychological and Structural Dependence After Colonialism:' in
Aguibou Yansane (ed.), Decolonization and Dependence, Greenwood Press, Westport, 1980, p. 74; see also
Henri Grimal, Decolonization: the British French, Dutch and Belgian Empires, 1919-1963, Routledge and
Kegan Paul, London, 1978, pp. 37-39. P. B. Harris suggested: "What colonial powers experienced (and for
the large part did not like) was elite nationalism, that is a nationalism built around some powerful
westernised African figure, an Nkrumah, a Kenyatta, a Leopold Senghor." The Withdrawal of the Major
European Powers from Africa, Monographs on Political Science, no. 2, University College of Rhodesia,
Salisbury, 1969, p. 4.
19. See Benjamin Quarles, The Negro in the American Revolution, University of North Carolina Press,
Chapel Hill, 1961; Lerone Bennett, Before the Mayflower, Johnson Publications, Chicago, 1964; and Geiss,
op. cit., pp. 32-35.
In Brazil and Cuba, the formation of Black petit bourgeoisies was retarded by a number of intervening
factors. In Brazil, after the abolition of slavery and the organization of a republican government in the late
nineteenth century, European workers were imported to provide the social base for industrialization,
partly as a response to the failure of Blacks to appreciate the advantages of exchanging freedom for
proletarianization. The liberal Brazilian sociologist, Florestan Fernandes, has lamented: "Seeing and feeling themselves free, the Negroes wanted to be treated like men or, as they saw it, like those who were
masters of their own lives. A fatal lack of adaptation on the part of the Negroes and mulattos resulted. The
attitude and behavior of the ex-slaves, who conceived of their freedom as being absolute, irritated white
employers. The Negroes assumed that since they were 'free,' they could work when and where they pleased.
They tended not to show up for work whenever they had money enough on hand to live for a while
without working; they especially did not like to be remonstrated with, warned, or reprimanded." Fernandes, "The Weight of the Past:' Daedalus 96 (Spring 1967):563. Still, in cities like Bahia and Sao Paulo, a
small Black petit bourgeoisie made an appearance at the turn of the century. However, since Black labor
was already becoming incidental to Brazilian capitalists, that middle class was not encouraged or systematically nurtured. When they did produce reformist organizations like the Frente Negra Brasileira as happened between 1925 and 1935, those organizations were ruthlessly suppressed. It would not be until after the
Second World War that a militant Black intelligentsia would re-emerge. See Florestan Fernandes, The
Negro in Brazilian Society, Columbia University Press, New York, 1969, pp. 210-23; and Anani Dzidzienyo,
"The Position of Blacks in Brazilian Society," Minority Rights Group, no. 7, London, 1979,pp. 2-11. In Cuba,
the social and political bases for the Black petit bourgeois intelligentsia was undermined largely by the
contradictions introduced by the revolutionary war against Spain at the end of the nineteenth century. The
American military co-opted the revolution into the Spanish-American War. And during the American
military occupation of Cuba, which began in 1898, the Ejercito Libertador (Liberation Army), threequarters of which consisted of Black Cubans, was destroyed. See Lourdes Casal, "Race Relations in Contemporary Cuba," Minority Rights Group, no. 7, London, 1979, pp. 13-14, and Louis A. Perez, Army Politics
in Cuba, 1898-1958, University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, 1976, pp. 3-9. Reviewing the Cuban
censuses of the nineteenth century and the decline of the Black and mulatto population between 1887 and
1899, Kenneth Kiple cannot help but wonder whether still another war was in progress: "Did the unhappy
results of Spain's policy of reconcentration fall most heavily on the blacks? Was the war itself more of a
racial war than has been portrayed, with black pitted, for the most part, against white? Did the blacks in
fact bear the brunt of the fighting?" Kiple, Blacks in Colonial Cuba, 1774-1899, University of Florida Press,
Gainesville, 1976, p. 81. Lourdes Casal has fewer doubts about a later event in Cuban history that has
remained equally obscure. In 1912, the anti-Black movement in part inspired by American influence in
Cuba reached a culmination. The suppression of an association of Black voters, the Partido de 10s Independientes de Color, led to armed revolt and "the ensuing racial war, still insufficiently studied, led to a
nationwide extermination of blacks of quasi-genocidal proportions." Casal, op. cit., p. 14. This was "the
little war of 1912." Casal recalls as a child listening to the stories in her family: "A grand-uncle of mine was
assassinated, supposedly by orders of Monteagudo, the rural guard officer who terrorized blacks throughout the island. Chills went down my spine when I heard stories about blacks being hunted day and night;
and black men being hung by their genitals from the lamp posts in the central plazas of small Cuban
towns." Ibid., p. 12. See also Thomas T. Orum, "The Politics of Colour: The Racial Dimension of Cuban
Politics during the Early Republican Years, 19oo-l9iz:' Ph.D. diss., Department of History, New York
University, 1975 (cited by Casal).
20. Alex Dupuy, "Class Formation and Underdevelopment in Nineteenth-Century Haiti:' Race and Class
24, no. 1(Summer 1982):24.
21. See David Nicholls, From Dessalines to Duvalier, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1979,
passim; and Imanuel Geis, op. cit., pp. 316ff.
NOTES TO PAGE 181

371

22. For the founding and early years of these institutions, see Leslie Fishel, Jr. and Benjamin Quarles
(eds.), The Black American, Scott, Foreshaw, Morrow, Glenview, 1970, pp. 160% and Arna Bontemps, loo
Years ofNegro Freedom, Dodd, Mead and Co., New York, 1961, passim. Some 75 years after the founding of
the first "Negro College," Dean Kelly Miller of Howard University made the following assessment of their
political relations: "Dean Miller divided Negro colleges into three types on the basis of the racial composition of their faculties. Lincoln (Pennsylvania) and Hampton were placed in the category of those under
exclusive white control. Those with mixed directors and faculty included Fisk and Howard, and those
wholly under Negro support and management were identified as Morehouse, Wilberforce, and Tuskegee."
Cited by Robert Brisbane, The Black Vanguard, Judson Press, Valley Forge, 1970, p. 103. Dean Miller's
analysis would shortly be proved a bit naive. The year prior to his complaint (1926), student strikes and
demonstrations at Fisk and Howard Universities had led to the installation of Black administrations.
Lincoln too underwent some administrative changes during that year as a response to Black student and
faculty complaints, though at Hampton, in 1927, the results were less satisfactory. Brisbane, op. cit., pp.
101-11. Despite these concessions, it is clear that a few years later when a Congressional investigation into
Communism at Howard University took place, the control of this institution (and probably its sister
colleges and universities) was still firmly in the hands of its political and financial benefactors, i.e.,
representatives and officials of American capital. See Michael Wreszin, "The Dies Committee," in Arthur
Schlesinger, Jr. and Roger Burns (eds.), Congress Investigates, Chelsea House, New York, 1975; and August
Ogden, The Dies Committee, Catholic University Press of America, Washington, D.C., 1948, p. 87.
23. Interview with C. L. R. James, Binghamton, New York, Spring 1974.
24. See James R. Hooker, Black Revolutionary: George Padmore's Path From Communism to PanAfricanism, Prkger, New York, 1970, pp. 2-3; and C. L. R. James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., pp. 17-18.
25. Eric Williams, Inward Hunger, Andre Deutsch, London, 1969, pp. 26-30.
26. See Gordon D. Morgan, "In Memoriam: Oliver C. Cox, 1901-1974," Monthly Review, May 1976, pp.
34-40,
27. "To me it was all in order and I took it philosophically. I cordially despised the poor Irish and South
German, who slaved in the mills, and annexed the rich and well-to-do as my natural companions." W. E. B.
Du Bois, Darkwater, Constable and Co., London, 1920, p. lo. See also Francis Broderick, W E. B. DuBois:
Negro Leader in a Time of Crisis, Stanford University Press, Stanford, 1959, pp. 2-6, for Du Bois's early racial
ambivalence.
28. See Michel Fabre, The Unfinished Quest of Richard Wright, William Morrow, New York, 1973, pp. 430; and Addison Gayle, Richard Wright: Ordeal of a Native Son, AnchorIDoubleday, New York, 1980,
P P 2-5.
29. In the summer of 1953, Wright had traveled to the Gold Coast colony (now Ghana) to observe the
beginnings of self-government scheduled for July of that year. His recollections of that journey were
published as Black Power (Harper and Brothers, New York, 1954).In that record, he recalled a conversation
with the Efiduasihene, Nana Kwame Dua Aware I1 where he had declared: "I'm black, Nana, but I'm
Western; and you must never forget that we of the West brought you to this pass. We invaded your country
and shattered your culture in the name of conquest and progress. And we didn't quite know what we were
doing when we did it. If the West dared to have its way with you now, they'd harness your people again to
solve their problems. . . . It's not of me, Nana, that you must ask advice" (p. 288). I have remarked on
Wright's identity crisis in the Gold Coast in "A Case of Mistaken Identity," paper presented to the African
Studies Association Conference, Los Angeles, November 1979. See also Gayle, op. cit., pp. 238-44, for the
reactions of Wright to his first encounter with Africa.
30. Interview with C. L. R. James, Binghamton, New York, Spring 1974.
31. "European socialism was born of the Agrarian Revolution and the Industrial Revolution which
followed it. . . . These two revolutions planted the seeds of conflict within society, and not only was
European socialism born of that conflict, but its apostles sanctified the conflict itself into a philosophy. . . .
The true African socialist does not look on one class of men as his brethren and another as his natural
enemies. He does not form an alliance with the 'brethren' for the extermination of the 'non-brethren.' "
Julius Nyerere, "Ujamaa-The Basis of African Socialism," in Ujamaa: Essays on Socialism, Oxford University Press, Dares Salaam, 1979, p. 11.
32. "The working class in a leading nation, therefore, has sufficient reason to walk arm in arm with its
oligarchy against the world. On imperialist questions, we should ordinarily expect this class to be nationalistic, because a threat to the imperial position of the nation tends to become a threat to its own
welfare. The class struggle thus goes on at home, as I have indicated, for a larger share of the national
income. But it is a struggle that tends to stop at the water's edge where antagonisms with rival imperialists
and exploited backward peoples begin. The working people of a leading capitalist nation are likely to rise
up in wrath against those of their fellows who disclaim the imperialist actions of the government, regarding them as traitors." Oliver C. Cox, Capitalism as a System, Monthly Review Press, NewYork, 1964, p. 194.
Of Marxists, Cox declared: "Having accepted the fundamental Marxian postulates on the nature of capitalist society, Marxists cannot go back to Venetian, Hanseatic, Dutch or even early English imperialism for the

372

NOTES TO PAGES 1 8 2 - 8 3

essential concepts of the components of that phenomenon. It thus becomes a crucially limiting position
which entails procrustean operations in the handling of the facts of modern social change as they relentlessly impose themselves upon us. The rigid ideas concerning the role of industrial workers in modern
revolutionary movements, and the earlier Marxian predictions giving precedence to the more advanced
capitalist nations in the succession of socialist revolutions, are all derivatives of the theory." Ibid., p. 218.
33. Quoted by David Caute, Communism and the French Intellectuals, 1914-1960, Macmillan, New York,
1964, p. 211.

Chapter Nine
1. For a sense of Du Bois's range of interests and activities, see the tributes published by John Henrik
Clarke, Esther Jackson, Ernest Kaiser, J. H. O'Dell (eds.), Black Titan: W E. B. Du Bois, Beacon Press,
Boston, 1970; the essays in Rayford Logan (ed.), W E. B. Du Bois: A Profile, Hill and Wang, New York, 1971;
Daniel Walden (ed.), W E. B. Du Bois: The Crisis Writings, Fawcett, Greenwich, 1972; and, of course,
Broderick, op. cit.
2. The second native American intellectual whose name should be included in any study of American
Marxist theorists is Sidney Hook. Apparently under the influence of Georg Lukacs in his earlier years,
Hook published From Hegel to Marxiri the 1930s. As well, he contributed some useful essays in the attempt
to extend knowledge of Marxian thought in the United States. (Cf. "Materialism," Encyclopedia of Social
Sciences, vol. lo, New York, 1933.) However, he is best know to later generations for his anti-Communism.
See Cristiano Camporesi, "The Marxism of Sidney Hook," Telos (Summer 1972): 115-28; C. L. R. James,
"The Philosophy of History and Necessity: A Few Words with Professor Hook:' in Spheres of Existence, op.
cit., pp. 49-58; and for some clues to Hook's political disaffection, Daniel Bell, Marxian Socialism in the
United States, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1967, pp. 139-40. Some 15 years earlier, Lenin had
singled out Daniel De Leon for special mention; see New York World, 4 February 1919, p. 2; and Arthur
Liebman, Jews and the Left, John Wiley, New York, 1979, pp. 449-51. Officially in the i93os, the most
prominent American Marxist thinker was Earl Browder, the General Secretary of the American Communist Party from 1930 to 1945: "During his leadership of the American C.I.:' his closest friend in Moscow,
Georgi Iknitrott, then General Secretary of the Communist International, described Browder as the
leading Marxist in the English speaking world. From 1935 to 1945, Browder was praised and revered by the
left in the United States almost as fervently as was Stalin in the Soviet Union. His published output would
total perhaps two million words." Philip Jaffe, The Rise and Fall of American Communism, Horizon Press,
New York, 1975, p. 17. For another insider's view of Browder, consult Joseph Starobin's American Cornmunism in Crisis, 1943-1957, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1972, passim. Both Jaffe and Starobin
were sympathetic to Browder (and wrote after his expulsion from leadership and his subsequent decanonization), and thus prove much more convincingly, though inadvertently, the case for his theoretical
shallowness.
3. Since the phenomenon of the collective myth precedes by millennia the emergence of the modern
state, and because Western thought has displayed this phenomenon as one of its enduring concerns, the
relevant literature is massive. However, there are a number of works spanning a range of disciplines,
intellectual traditions and even epistemologies to which one might refer, some are analytical while others
are ideological. Each, though, is an attempt to provide proof or at least a demonstration of the thesis that
social orders are accompanied by fabulous rationalizations. Among the analytical are Ernst Cassirer's The
Myth of the State; Murray Edelman's The Symbolic Uses of Politics; Sigmund Freud's Group Psychology and
the Analysis of the Ego; Petr Kropotkin's essay, "The State: Its Historic Role"; Marx and Engels, The German
Ideology; Wilhelm Reich's The Mass Psychology of Fascism; Cedric J. Robinson, The Terms of Order; Max
Weber, Economy and Society. Among those that are less analytical and more ideological are: Robert Dahl's
Pluralist Democracy in the United States; Hegel's Philosophy of Right; Samuel Huntington's Social Order in
Changing Societies, Seymour M. Lipset's The First New Nation; and Plato's Republic.
4. The culture of imperialism makes for an interesting case study of the relationship between power and
myth-makers. With respect to British imperialism, the following studies are useful; Brian Street, The
Savage in Literature, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London 1975; Jonah Raskm, The Mythology oflmperialism,
Dell, New York, 1971; and L. P. Curtis, Jr., Anglo-Saxons and Celts, New York University Press, New York,
1968. Street, in summarizing Curtis's discussion of Anglo-Saxonism, points out that Curtis showed "how
the historians of the day (Kemble, Green, Stubbs, Freeman, Charles Kingsley and Froude) constantly
referred to this racial heritage to explain current history and created genealogies of English royalty, English
families, and English customs to support their claims. Popular fiction was able to give dramatic life to these
claims by presenting them in terms of concrete characters, whose abilities and actions brought home to the
reader just what it meant to be an Englishman. These qualities are brought into vivid contrast with the
'baser' actions and qualities of the 'inferior' races of the world." Street, op. cit., p. 19. See also Daniel A.
Offiong, "The Cheerful School and the Myth of the Civilizing Mission of Colonial Imperialism," PanAfrican lournalg, no. 1 (1976):35-54.
NOTES TO PAGES 1 8 4 - 8 6

373

5. Ferdinand Lundberg's Cracks in the Constitution, Lyle Stuart, New York, 1980, is the latest contribution
to the literature that examines the American "Founding Fathers." In his review essay of Lundberg, Gore
Vidal observed: "The state legislatures accredited seventy-four men to the convention. Fifty-five showed up
that summer. About half drifted away. Finally, 'no more than five men provided most of the discussion
with some seven more playing fitful supporting roles.' Thirty-three framers were lawyers (already the blight
had set in); forty-four were present or past members of Congress; twenty-one were rated rich to very richWashington and the banker Robert Morris (soon to go to jail where Washington would visit him) were the
richest; 'another thirteen were affluent to very affluent'; nineteen were slave owners; twenty-five had been
to college (among those who had not matriculated were Washington, Hamilton, Robert Morris, George
Mason-Hamilton was a Columbia drop-out). Twenty-seven had been officers in the war; one was a twiceborn Christian-the others tended to deism, an eighteenth-century euphemism for agnosticism or atheism." Vidal, "The Second American Revolution?:' The New York Review of Books, 5 February 1981, pp. 3738. With respect to the Constitution, Vidal maintains: "The Framers wanted no political parties-or
factions. It was their view that all right-minded men of property would think pretty much alike on matters
pertaining to property. To an extent, this was-and is-true." Ibid., p. 41. See also Charles Beard, "Neglected
Aspects of Political Science," American Political Science Review 43 (April 1948): 222.
6. See Frances Fitzgerald, America Revised, Vintage Books, New York, 1980.
7, "The removal of the Indians was explained by Lewis Cass-Secretary of War, governor of the Michigan territory, minister to France, presidential candidate: 'A principle of progressive improvement seems
almost inherent in human nature. . . . We are all striving in the career of life to acquire riches of honor, or
power, or some other object, whose possession is to realize the day dreams of our imaginations; and the
aggregate of these efforts constitutes the advance of society. But there is little of this in the constitution of
our savages.' " Howard Zinn, A People's History of the United States, Harper and Row, New York, 1980, p.
q o . Cass, like his predecessor in what was termed at the time "Indian removal," was responsible for the
expropriation of millions of acres from native Americans, thus promoting "their interest against their
inclination." Moreover, "Cass-pompous, pretentious, honored (Harvard gave him an honorary doctor of
laws degree in 1836, at the height of Indian removal) claimed to be an expert on the Indians. But he
demonstrated again and again, in Richard Drinnon's words (Violence in the American Experience: Winning
the West),a 'quite marvellous ignorance of Indian life' " (ibid.). Of the official legend surrounding Andrew
Jackson, one of Cass's predecessors, Zinn writes: "The leading books on the Jacksonian period, written by
respected historians (The Age of Jackson by Arthur Schlesinger; The Jacksonian Persuasion by Marvin
Mayers), do not mention Jackson's Indian policy, but there is much talk in them of tariffs, banking,
political parties, political rhetoric. If you look through high school textbooks and elementary school
textbooks in American history you will find Jackson the frontiersman, soldier, democrat, man of the
people-not Jackson the slaveholder, land speculator, executioner of dissident soldiers, exterminator of
Indians." Ibid., pp. 128-29.
8. See Dee Brown, Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1971; Vine
Deloria, Jr., Custer Died for Your Sins, Macmillan, New York, 1969; and David Bidney, "The Idea of the
Savage in North American Ethnohistory," Journal of the History ofldeas 15, no. 2 (1954): 322-27.
9. Wesley Frank Craven, White, Red, and Black, University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville, 1971, p. 84.
lo. For an excellent expose of the contemporary industry of pseudoscientific racism, see "Racism,
Intelligence and the Working Class:' published by the Party for Workers Power, Boston, n.d. (but after
1973); and Thomas Gossett, Race: The History of an Idea in America, Southern Methodist University Press,
Dallas, 1963.
11. W. E. B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction in America, 1860-1880, World Publishing, Cleveland, 1969
(original 1935), p. 718. Thirty years after Du Bois, the controversy surrounding the "Dunning school" was
still unresolved. In 1967, Gerald Grob and George Billias would declare: "Underlying the interpretation of
the Dunning school were two important assumptions. The first was that the South should have been
restored to the union quickly and without being exposed to Northern vengeance. . . . Secondly, responsibility for the freedmen should have been entrusted to white Southerners. The Negro, these historians
believed, could never be integrated into American society on an equal plane with whites because of his
former slave status and inferior racial characteristics." Gerard N. Grob and George A. Billias (eds.),
Interpretations of American History, Free Press, New York, 1967, ~ 4 7 2On
. the other hand, Dunning et al.
still had their apologists. Wendell Holmes Stephenson suggested: "Southern enthusiasts brought sectional
history into better balance, but they, like their predecessors ['north-easterners'], neglected the role of the
Negro, and very early in their careers closed their minds to anthropological scholarship." Stephenson,
Southern History in the Making, Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge, 1964, p. 250.
12. Du Bois, ibid., p. 723. In 1939, Francis Simpkins would echo Du Bois's judgment: "A biased interpretation of Reconstruction caused one of the most important political developments in the recent history of
the South, the disfranchisement of the blacks. The fraud and violence by which this objective was first
obtained was justified on a single ground: the memory of the alleged horrors of Reconstruction. Later,
amid a flood of oratory concerned with this memory, the white rulers of the South, in constitutional
374

NOTES TO PAGES 186-88

conventions of the 1890s and igoos, devised legal means to eliminate the Negro vote. 'Reconstruction,'
asserted the prime justifier of this act, 'was this villainy, anarchy, misrule and robbery, and I cannot, in any
words that I possess, paint it.' These words of Ben Tillman were endorsed by all shades of white opinion
from Carter Glass, Henry W. Grady, and Charles B. Aycock to Tom Watson, Hoke Smith, and James K.
Vardaman." Simpkins in Grob and Billias, op. cit., p. 499. For Dunning's and Burgess's contributions to the
development of American political science, see Bernard Crick, The American Science of Politics, Routledge
and Kegan Paul, London, 1959, pp. 26-31,135-37; and Albert Somit and Joseph Tannenhaus, The Development of (American) Political Science: From Burgess to Behavioralism, Allyn and Bacon, Boston, 1967, ch. 3.
For an earlier lionization of Dunning, see Charles Merriam, "William Archibald Dunning:' in Howard W.
Odum (ed.), American Masters of Social Science, Holt, New York, 1927, pp. 131-45.
13. Quoted by Raphael Samuel, "British Marxist Historians," New Left Review 124 (MarchIApril 1980):
28. Rainboro is also spelled Rainborough.
14. Zinn, op. cit., p. 247.
15. Nell Irwin Painter, Exodusters: Black Migration to Kansas After Reconstruction, Alfred Knopf, New
York, 1976, pp. igff.
16. Douglas Daniels, Pioneer Urbanites, Temple University Press, Philadelphia, 1980, p. 44.
17. "The new cause was defined as 'white supremacy'-which in practice allowed Southern whites to
reduce the freedmen to an inferior caste, as they had attempted to do by enacting the 'Black Codes' of 1865.
To further this cause in 1868, [JohnVan Evrie simply reissued his book Negroes and Negro 'Slavery'with a
topical introduction and under the new title White Supremacy and Negro Subordination. [Josiah] Nott also
entered the Reconstruction controversy. In an 1866 pamphlet he reasserted the 'scientific' case for inherent
black inferiority as part of an attack on the Freedmen's Bureau and other Northern efforts to deal with the
Southern race question," and so on. George Frederickson, The Black Image in the White Mind, Harper and
Row, New York, 1971, p. 187. Of course the new cause was not entirely monopolized by "Southern whites,"
as the ambiguous phrase goes; see Lawanda and John H. Cox, "Negro Suffrage and Republican Politics: The
Problem of Motivation in Reconstruction Historiography," in Frank Otto Gatell and Allen Weinstein
(eds.), American Themes: Essays in Historiography, Oxford University Press, New York, 1968, pp. 232-60.
Forrest Wood also makes this clear in his study of the post-bellum period, Black Scare: the Racist Response to
Emancipation and Reconstruction, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1968, pp. 30-36, though he is
also capable of obfuscation on his own part: "The political exploitation of racism in the United States did
not originate during the 1860s. But there was a difference between ante-bellum bigotry and the bigotry that
followed the Emancipation Proclamation. Before the war there had been little reason for arousing hatred
against Negroes because most of them had been slaves. Since, by law, they had been subordinate to whites,
there had been little need to launch crusades for the purpose of keeping them in their 'place' " (p. 16).
Implicit in Wood's casual absurdity is the assumption of Black passivity to oppression and more; the
excision of the contradictions embodied in the exploitation of African and European labor; the dismissal
of the political confrontation between agrarian capital and manufacturing capital in the late eighteenth
century; the ignoring of the extensive period of rationalization of the slave trade; and the dropping of the
Abolition movement from history. It was hardly the case, as Wood suggests, that the "Anglo-Saxon selfimage was a sleeping giant that needed only to be aroused." Ibid., p. 16.
18. "Many of the most influential of our early university professors of American history were Germantrained, and from their German professors they had taken over much of the Teutonic view of history. . . .
This, of course, was a racist concept of history and it should be said that by no means all our historians
accepted it. But many of them did." Wesley Frank Craven, The Legend of the Founding Fathers, Cornell
University Press, Ithaca, 1956, p. 175. "At the turn of the century the American public and the academic
community in general, moved by both international and domestic social trends that emphasized the
progress of Western Teutonism as opposed to the backwardness of the colored races, had come to believe
the extreme theories of black inferiority, and had accepted the disfranchisement and social regimentation
of Southern Negroes. The allegedly sordid spectacle of black participation in Reconstruction was advanced
as public exhibit number one that Negroes were incapable of political sophistication; social scientists and
fiction writers presented a formidable array of racist material that convinced a receptive white America of
the innate cultural and moral inferiority of blacks." William C. Harris in his introduction to John R.
, vi-vii.
Lynch's The Facts ofReconstruction, Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis, 1970 (orig. i g ~ )pp.
19. For the earliest reactions of the Black petit bourgeoisie to racial fantasy and the Reconstruction, see
the discussion of Charlotte Forten, Robert G. Fitzgerald, T. Thomas Fortune, John Wallace, and John
Lynch in Daniel Savage Gray, "Bibliographic Essay: Black Views on Reconstruction," Journal of Negro
History 58, no. 1 (January 1973): 73-85; and Allen W. Jones, "The Black Press in the 'New South': Jesse C.
Duke's Struggle for Justice and Equality," Journal of Negro History 64, no. 3 (Summer 1979):215-28. Duke,
the editor of the Black newspaper, the Montgomery Herald, was not above swinging his cudgel at the most
vulnerable appendage of racist white males. In one of his last editorials in Montgomery he attacked a recent
lynching of a Blackman by suggesting that the lynchers ask themselves: "Why is it that white women attract
negro men now more than in former days?. . . . There is no secret to this thing, and we greatly suspect it is
NOTES TO PAGES 1 8 8 - 8 9

375

the growing appreciation of the white Juliet for the colored Romeo, as he becomes more intelligent and
refined." Ibid., p. 221. Having made his point, he promptly left town.
20. W. Augustus Low maintains that William C. Nell, writing in the mid-nineteenth century, was the first
Afro-American to produce "nonslave" historical accounts, but that George W. Williams "was regarded as
'the most eminent Negro historian in the world' in his day. His book, A History of the Negro Troops in the
War of Rebellion, 1861-1865 (1888), for example, long remained distinctively in a class by itself." Low,
"Historians," in W. Augustus Low and Virgil Cloft (eds.), Encyclopedia of Black America, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1981, p. 440. Williams is also discussed in more detail in Earl(ie) E. Thorpe, Black Historians,
William Morrow, New York, 1970. Geiss discusses William W. Brown's earlier work; Geiss, op. cit., pp. 1078.
21. lohn E. Bruce, for instance, in his address to a Philadelphia audience in October 1877, "Reasons Why
the Colored American Should Go to Africa," spoke as a committed journalist: "For centuries the colored
race has not been highly educated. This has not always been the fact, and history, which shows what has
been done proves what may yet be. The Africans held possession of southern Egypt when Isaiah wrote,
'Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God.' When the Queen of Sheba brought added wealth to
the treasures of Solomon, and when a princely and learned Ethiopian became a herald of Christ before
Paul the Hebrew, Cornelius, or the European soldiers were converted. The race to whom had been given
the wonderful continent of Africa, can be educated and elevated to wealth, power and station among the
nations of the earth." Philip S. Foner (ed.), The Voice of Black America, Capricorn, New York, 1972, ~ 4 9 0 .
See also Moses, op. cit., p. 198.
22. George Washington Williams, A History of the Negro Race in America from 1619 to 1880, 2 vols., G. P.
Putnam's Sons, New York, 1883.
23. This paradigm was already being vented with respect to the African continent; see the discussion of
Alexander Crummell in Wilson Moses, op. cit., pp. 59-82; and David McBride, "Africa's Elevation and
Changing Racial Thought at Lincoln University, 1854-1886:' Journal of Negro History 62, no. 4 (October
1977):363-77.
24. In an essay published in 1903 entitled "The Talented Tenth," Du Bois went to great pains to establish
the fact of the existence of an educated and propertied Black elite in the United States. In it, he briefly
described the history of the 34 Black colleges and universities in existence at that time, and gave some
indication of the status of their curricula; he reported on the total number of Black graduates from white
and Black colleges from 1876 to 1899, and gave a representative sampling of their occupations, and an
estimate of their property. See Julius Lester (ed.), The Seventh Son: The Thought and Writings of W E. B. Du
Bois, Vintage, New York, 1971, ~391-95;and for the beginnings of a post-Reconstruction entrepreneurial
class in the South, Manning Marable, Blackwater, Black Praxis Press, Dayton, 1981, pp. 53-68; and Moses,
op. cit., pp. 89-90.
25. A useful instance demonstrating the psychological distance traversed by the Black middle class is
given by Jeremiah Moses in his discussion of the Black women's club movement in the late nineteenth
century: "The club movement among Afro-American woman (sic) had its beginnings in the early 1800s
with the formation of groups in those cities of the United States where the black middle class was large
enough to provide a membership. 'As a general rule,' says Fannie Barrier Williams, 'those who, in the
proper sense, may be called the best women in the communities where these clubs were organized, became
interested and joined in the work of helpfulness.' Mrs. Williams saw this as a refutation of the charge that
'colored women of education and refinement had no sympathetic interest in their own race.' " Moses, op.
cit., p. 105
26. See Marable, op. cit., pp. 60-61; and Du Bois's description of the "Tuskegee Machine," in the text,
note 43.
27. Of the early Ku Klux Klan, Allan Trelease writes: "Klan membership throughout the South resembled
that in Tennessee; it was drawn from every rank and class of white society. . . . The maintenance of white
supremacy, and the old order generally, was a cause in which white men of all classes felt an interest." Whzte
Terror, Harper Torchbooks, New York, 1971, p. 51. "Leadership within the organization more clearly
belonged to the professional and planter class which had governed the region before the Radicals displaced
them politically, but their economic and social power was hardly affected." Ibid., p. 296. On the level of
Federal law and Constitutionally guaranteed rights, the story was the same: "If by 1890 it had become clear
to the American Negro that he could not expect to obtain justice and fair play through the regular political
processes of the national and state governments it would soon become equally clear to him that he could
not expect much more from the courts of the land and especially the United States Supreme Court:'
Brisbane, op. cit., p. 25.
28. One Black spokesman, William Hooper Councill, expressed a mistaken notion that has long survived
him: "Councill had a grotesquely exaggerated idea of white racial solidarity. He assumed that the whites
had a great sense of loyalty to and respect for one another, and especially for the weaker members of their
race. 'I honor the white man because he honors himself,' said Councill. 'I honor him because he places his
mother, sister, wife and daughter on a platform up among the stars, gets a thousand Gatling guns, and
376

NOTES TO PAGES 1 9 0 - 9 1

decrees death to him who seeks to drag them down. I honor him because he throws his powerful arms
around every little red-headed freckled-face, poor white girl and boy in the land and makes the way
possible for them to rise in the world.' This, of course, was pure nonsense in an age characterized by the
degradation of labor and the exploitation of women and children by the forces of free enterprise." Moses,
op. cit., p. 76.
29. The first draft of this chapter contained the term "Teutonic" here but it was thought it might
misdirect rather than clarify. Still, Moses indicates that both Crummell and Edward Wilmot Blyden, the
Americo-Liberian born in the Virgin Islands, were quite conscious of Germanic models. Moses, op. cit., p.
281 n. 24.
30. Ibid., pp. 70-71.
31. Ibid., p. 198.
32. Ibid., p. 73.
33. Ibid., pp. 103-31. Du Bois discusses his own and the relationship of other Boston Black intellectuals to
Mrs. Ruffin in The Autobiography of W E. B. Du Bois, International Publishers, n.p., 1968, pp. 136-37; he
also discussed Margaret Murray, a classmate at Fisk and the third wife of Booker T. Washington, ibid., p.
112. See also for Margaret Washington, Bontemps, op. cit., pp. 137-38,167.
34. "It was thinking on this order that led to the militarization of the black academic experience in such
institutions as Hampton and Tuskegee, where not only were trades taught, but a thoroughgoing militaryindustrial organization of community life was enforced." Moses, op. cit., p. 75.
35. Ibid., pp. 214-15.
36. Ibid., p. 73.
37. The search for and designation of the seminal figure should have been by this time recognized as a
frequently misconceived and reductionist venture. This seems particularly the case when ideas and ideology are the subject of investigation. Whether codified in a didactic or scholastic literature or manifest in
social collectives, the elements of consciousness and thought are generally shared by force of circumstance,
social and historical continuity, language, culture, and interest. Individual achievement may be seen as the
culmination of a collective momentum marked by extraordinary circumstance (imagination, location,
etc.). As such it is likely it is being replicated or in the process of coming into being elsewhere, either
simultaneously or otherwise.
38. See Thorpe, op. cit.
39. "Blyden was one of a few Negroes to make a significant impact on the English-speaking literary and
scholastic world in the nineteenth century. . . . Basically, his writings were designed to vindicate the Negro
race. His major themes were: that the Negro race did have past achievements of which it could be proud,
that it had special inherent attributes which it should strive to project in a distinctive 'African Personality,'
that African culture-its customs and institutions-were basically wholesome and should be preserved;
and finally, that Christianity had a retarding influence upon the Negro, while that of Islam had been
salutary-his most controversial theme, and one on which he wrote at length." Hollis Lynch, Edward
Wilrnot Blyden: Pan-Negro Patriot, 1832-1912, Oxford University Press, London, 1970, pp. 54-55; see also
Moses, op. cit., pp. 42-45.
40. Moses, op. cit., pp. 134-36; see also August Meier, "The Paradox of W. E. B. Du Bois:' in Logan, op.
cit., p. 83; and Broderick, op. cit., pp. 52-54. The "Conservation of Races" is republished in the collection of
writings edited by Julius Lester, Du Bois, The Seventh Son, op. cit., pp. 176-87.
41. Du Bois, "The Talented Tenth:' in The Seventh Son, op. cit., p. 385.
42. The Autobiography of M.! E. B. Du Bois, op. cit., pp. 236-37.
43. Ibid., p. 239. Robert Brisbane, who as a political scientist at Morehouse College should know this
history intimately, supports Du Bois: "[Washington's] opinions were widely publicized and his patrons,
which included philanthropists such as Andrew Carnegie, Jacob Schiff, and Julius Rosenwald, contributed
hundreds of thousands of dollars to Tuskegee Institute. In time, it became difficult for any Negro college or
institution to obtain funds from philanthropists if Washington withheld his approval. . . . [Tlhis point
was. . . driven home to John Hope during his first years as president of Morehouse College." Brisbane, op.
cit., p. 32.
44. "[Wlhen placed in their historical setting, it is easy enough to explain how it was that the social
philosophy of the Negro historians, sadly lacking in a grasp of the dynamic forces, turned out to be the
rather naive Emersonian gospel of self-reliance, simple optimism and patient regard for destiny. Notwithstanding all that has been said, let us not be misunderstood. We have little quarrel with these chroniclers
gone by. They served their day and in that day few men in America realized what was going o n . . . when we
see the story of the Negro since Emancipation as the record of the clashes and rationalizations of individual
and group impulse against an American social order of an unfolding capitalism, within which operates
semi-articulate arrangements and etiquettes of class and caste, we begin to understand." Reddick, "A New
Interpretation for Negro History," Journal ofNegro Historyzl, no. 1 (January 1937): 26-27.
45. Washington, in any case, was not bound by any manner of class courtesy when his political position
was threatened. He manipulated the Negro press through those newspapers he subsidized or owned
NOTES TO PAGES 191-94

377

(which included the New York Age, the Washington Colored American, Alaanderi Magazine and the
Washington Bee-see Brisbane, op. cit., p. 38), and had resort to more insidious methods: "Washington
began plotting the destruction of the Niagara Movement from the very day of its inception. He planted
spies and informers within the group and actually sought to encourage dissension and division. And
through the use of his considerable influence over the editors and publishers of Negro newspapers, he was
able to effectuate at least a partial blackout of news of the Niagara Movement within the Negro press." Ibid.,
p. 41. Du Bois characterized the method of the Tuskegee-fronted structure of domination "monstrous and
dishonest." Du Bois, The Autobiography, op. cit., p. 247.
46. Du Bois, The Autobiography, op. cit., p. 238 Some of the care with which Washington and his image
were treated by American capitalism is apparent in most biographies of the man, generally inserted as a
demonstration of influence over the capitalists who subsidized him! They made certain that a steady
stream of publications, lectures, and letters were seen to come from his hand by subsidizing "ghost
writers"; Carnegie insured an income for life for Washington and his third wife; and they set beside him as
his personal secretary, Emmett Scott, a man schooled in Black political patronage. See Bontemps, op. cit.,
and Louis R. Harlan, Booker ?: Washington: The Making of a Black Leader, Oxford University Press, New
York, 1972. That their solicitousness with respect to Washington as an instrument of domination of the
Black petit bourgeoisie intelligentsia was substantially well placed is perhaps proven by the directions taken
by the next generation of that strata. Twelve years after Washington's death in 1915, Black students were in
revolt at Negro institutions of higher education. See Brisbane, op. cit., pp. 101-11. By the 1930s, the scientist,
George Washington Carver, the "folk saint" of Tuskegee and a large part of the substantiation of Washington's rationalizations on race, was embittered enough by his experiences in the South and elsewhere in
the country to send some of his best students to the Soviet Union and prescribe poisons for radical activist
friends who might use them as the less painful death in confrontation with white mobs. Linda 0. Hines,
"White Mythology and Black Duality: George W. Carver's Response to Racism and the Radical Left,''
Journal of Negro History 62, no. 2 (April 1977): 134-46.
47. "Populism had put in the minds of blacks certain higher expectations of life, and these could not be
beaten out by the boots of any Secret Nine or Red Shirts or other terrorist groups. Incorporated into the
blacks' past by 1900 were not only the heady power given to them and protected for them by Reconstruction governments but the more sober experience of Populism. In the Populist movement black people got a
sense of being equal participants in the political process, rather than mere recipients of federal favors; of
gaining their ends by the power of the vote. Numbers of blacks had worked and socialized with white
people of similar interests on a level of relative equality if not actual integration; had had the experiences of
organizing and campaigning, of committee work, party politics, national conventions; of listening to and
talking and reading about advanced economic ideas such as co-operatives and unions. They could not have
come out of the movement unchanged in their hopes and goals." Florette Henri, Black Migration, Anchor
Press, Garden City, 1976, pp. 10-11. For Populism, see Zinn, op. cit., pp. 280-89; Henri, op. cit., pp. 3-12;
and C. Vann Woodward, Tom Watson: Agrarian Rebel, Oxford University Press, New York, 1963.
48. See Ira Katznelson, Black Men, White Cities, Oxford University Press, London, 1973, pp. 106-8.
49. "In the 1880s, when data on lynching were first collected, reports showed more whites lynched than
blacks; the figures for lynch victims from 1882 to 1888 showed 595 whites and 440 blacks. By 1889 the trend
had reversed, and in the 1890s lynching of blacks soared as the ultimate expression of Jim Crow [segregation]" Henri, op. cit., p. 43. Henri continues, "Figures. . . show that of all Negroes lynched between 1889
and 1941, less than 17 per cent were even charged with rape. Murder and felonious assault were the most
usual charges. . . with rape the second most frequent. Among other offenses for which blacks were lynched
were . . . insulting a white woman, writing to or paying attention to white women, proposing to or eloping
with a white woman. . . testifying in court for another black or against a white, practicing voodoo, slapping
a child, throwing stones, rioting, introducing smallpox, or disobeying ferry regulations." Ibid. "From 1885
to 1927, according to figures published in the World Almanac, 3,226 Negroes were lynched in the United
States. During the same period 1,047 white persons were lynched in the United States. From 1885 to 1889
Negro lynchings ranged from 71 to 95 per year. In 1891, 121 Negroes were lynched. From 1891 until 1895
Negro lynchings ranged from 112 to 155 (1892). Since 1901 there has been no single year in which as many as
loo Negroes were lynched:' Scott Nearing, Black America, Schocken, New York, 1969 (orig. 1929), p. 206.
For the use of racism in the destruction of the Populist movement, see Zinn, op. cit., p. 285; Henri, op. cit.,
pp. 9-10; and Woodward, Tom Watson, op. cit., chaps. 21-23.
50. Henri, op. cit., p. 51.
51. For opposition to the migration from Southern planters hit by the loss of significant portions of their
cheap labor force, and for the remonstrations issued by Washington and other Black spokesmen to the
migrants that the South was where they were at their "best:' see Henri, ibid., pp. 73-79.
52. Trotter and George Forbes, graduates of Harvard and Amherst, respectively, in 1895, began the
publication of the Boston Guardian in order to express their opposition to Booker T. Washington. This was
in 1901, two years before Du Bois published his first public criticisms of Washington in his The Souls of
Black Folk. Trotter and Forbes, along with their fellow Bostonians, Archibald Grimkk and Clement Mor378

N O T E S T O PAGES 1 9 4 - 9 5

gan, established a formidable opposition to Washington, while in Chicago, the lawyers Ferdinand Barnett
and E. H. Morris, and in Philadelphia, the physician Dr. N. F. Mossell, organized groups critical of the
Tuskegee program in their communities. (See August Meier, "Radicals and Conservatives-A Modern
View," in Logan, op. cit., pp. 42-44, "Meanwhile, at least as early as 1902, Washington had been utilizing his
reservoirs of power to silence the opposition. He used personal influence to wean people away from the
radicals, attempted to deprive opponents of their government jobs, where possible arranged to have his
critics sued for libel, placed spies in radical organizations, employed his influence with philanthropists as
an effective weapon in dealings with educators and others, deprived critics of participation and subsidies in
political campaigns, and subsidized the Negro press to support him and to ignore or to attack the
opposition." Ibid., p. 47. In July of 1903, Trotter and Forbes were finally able to arrange a personal
confrontation with Washington at a meeting in Boston. The plan was to heckle Washington with barbed
questions, aided by 30 or more others. Apparently the Boston police had been forewarned by Washington's
attorney, William L. Lewis, and Trotter was arrested when he stood to address Washington. He was fined
$50.00 and sentenced to thirty days in jail. Brisbane, op. cit., pp. 38-39, 253 n. 11. "The news of Trotter's
imprisonment, in the summer of 1903, reached Du Bois at Atlanta University, where the latter was
conducting classes in sociology. Like Trotter's other friends and followers, Du Bois became incensed. . . . It
was here that Du Bois decided to abandon his efforts to improve the Negro's condition by 'Scientific study.'
"Direct political and social action was to be the new strategy." Ibid., p. 39. Du Bois gave a similar account of
these events; however, he put the events of the Boston meeting in 1905 and managed to suggest that the
events that followed-namely the founding of the Niagara movement-were largely at his initiative rather
than Trotter's. The Autobiography, op. cit., pp. 248-51. This tendency to reconstruct events with which he
had been involved so that they revolved around himself is noted in Geiss (op. cit., pp. 232-33) and Brisbane,
(op. cit., p. 253 n. 16). For examples of Trotter's critiques of Washington, see Francis Broderick and August
Meier (eds.), Negro Protest Thought in the Twentieth Century, Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis, 1965, pp. 25-30.
53. According to Herbert Aptheker, the editor of Du Bois's papers, John Brown was Du Bois's favorite
work, though he realized that his first historical monograph, The Suppression of the African Slave-Trade to
the United States of America, 1638-1870 (Schocken, New York, 1969 [orig. 1896]), was "in the conventional
sense:' his most scholarly. Aptheker, "The Historian," in Logan, op cit., p. 262. Kelly Miller's assertion that
Trotter wove a "subtle net" around Du Bois (see Meier, op. cit., p. 75) may be evidenced in the joint
communique that Trotter and Du Bois wrote for the Niagara movement in 1906, when they said of John
Brown: "We do not believe in violence, neither in the despised violence of the raid nor the lauded violence
of the soldier, nor the barbarous violence of the mob; but we do believe in John Brown, in that incarnate
spirit of justice, that hatred of a lie, that willingness to sacrifice money, reputation, and life itself on the
altar of right." Du Bois, The Autobiography, op. cit., p. 251.
54. "A new theme in the pages of the Horizon and The Crisis was Du Bois's interest in the labor
movement and in socialism. At one time he had viewed the white workmg class as the Negro's 'bitterest
opponent.' By 1904 he had come to believe that economic discrimination was in large part the cause of the
race problem, and to feel sympathetic toward the socialist movement. Three years later, he was writing
favorably ofthe socialists in the Horizon. Elsewhere he advised the socialists that their movement could not
succeed unless it included the Negro workers, and wrote that it was simply a matter of time before white
and black workers would see their common economic cause against the exploiting capitalists. Though in
1908 Du Bois did not vote for the socialists because they had no chance of winning, in 1911 he joined the
party. In a Marxist exegesis in the concluding pages of The Negro, Du Bois viewed both American Negroes
and Africans, both the white workers and the colored races, as exploited by white capital which employed
the notion of race differences as a rationalization of exploitation, segregation, and subordination. And he
predicted that the exploited of all races would unite and overthrow white capital, their common oppressor." August Meier, "The Paradox of W. E. B. Du Bois:' in Logan, op. cit., p. 82.
55. "The present world war is, then, the result of jealousies engendered by the recent rise of armed
national associations of labor and capital whose aim is the exploitation of the wealth of the world mainlyoutside the European circle of nations. These associations, grown jealous and suspicious at the division of
the spoils of trade-empire, are fighting to enlarge their respective shares; they look for expansion, not in
Europe but in Asia, and particularly in Africa." Du Bois, "The African Roots of War," in Clarke et al., op.
cit., p. 280 (the original essay appeared in the Atlantic Monthly, May 1915, pp. 707-14.
56. See Du Bois, "Judging Russia," The Crisis 33 (February 1927): 189-90. Du Bois visited the Soviet
Union in 1926,1936,1949, and 1959, visiting the Asian republics in his second and last trip. He was always
critical of anti-Soviet propaganda and seems to have been hopeful that the revolution would succeed until
his death. See Du Bois, The Autobiography, op. cit., pp. 29-43; and his criticism of the Nation's "wobblings
in the case of Russia" in a letter to Freda Kirchwey, 13 December 1939, in The Correspondence of W E. B. Du
Bois, 2, Herbert Aptheker (ed.), University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, 1976, pp. 202-3.
57. Du Bois's work in the Pan-Africanist movement is best reconstructed by Geiss, op. cit., pp. 229-62;
see also Richard B. Moore, "Du Bois and Pan Africa," in Clarke et al., op. cit., pp. 187-212; and C. L. R.
Tames, "W. E. B. Du Bois," in James, The Future in the Present, Allison and Busby, London, 1977, pp. 202-12.
NOTES TO PAGE 195

379

58. In his own treatment of Black Reconstruction, Herbert Aptheker, the Marxist thinker most intimate
with Du Bois's work, characterized him "as an idealist-philosophically speaking-in key areas of his
thinking." Aptheker, "The Historian," op. cit., p. 261. Aptheker seemed to believe that Du Bois came too late
to the works of Marx and Lenin for them to have had a profound impact on his conception of history.
George Streator, described by Aptheker as a leader in the student strike at Fisk University in 1925 who later
was asked by Du Bois to join him on the staff of The Crisis, was one of Du Bois's most informed critiques on
the Black Left. Streator wrote a number of scathing letters to Du Bois in 1935 on the subjects ofMarxism and
the capabilities of the Black middle class. See Aptheker (ed.), The Correspondenceof W E. B. Du Bois, op. cit.,
~ 8 6 - 9 6 .Streator wrote in 1941, according to Francis Broderick, "that he doubted that 'with all his talents
Du Bois ever did more than turn to those vivid pages where Marx hammered with telling effect against the
English society that gained its wealth through the African slave trade. All the rest to Du Bois was just so
much Hegel, and I doubt that Du Bois did much to Hegel when he was a student in Germany.' " Broderick,
op. cit., p. 148 note. Certain passages in Black Reconstruction might appear to confirm Aptheker's assessment
(e.g., "The political success of the doctrine of racial separation, which overthrew Reconstruction by uniting
the planter and the poor white, was far exceeded by its astonishing economic results," p. 700); but a close
reading of the study and the fact that Du Bois taught seminars on Marx in 1904 and 1933 and was himself a
student of German philosophy would seem to discredit Streator's criticisms. See Aptheker (ed.), The
Correspondence, op. cit., p. 76; Broderick, op. cit., p. 148; and Eugene C. Holmes, "W. E. B. Du Bois: the
Philosopher," in Clarke et al., op. cit., p. 79. In deference to Aptheker, whose interpretations of Marx have
also come under attack (see Paul Buhle, "American Marxist Historiography, 1900-1940,'' Radical America,
November 1970, p p 5-35; and James O'Brien et al., " 'New Left Historians' of the iy6os," Radical America,
November 1970, pp. 83-84), Black Reconstruction is hardly an idealist exercise in historiography. In the
work, and on innumerable occasions, Du Bois stresses the underlying economic bases f ~ the
r dismantling
of the experiment in reconstruction and for the reconciliation between industrial capitalists and the
southern agrarian capitalists who commanded labor and land in the antebellum period. The racial consciousness that prevented the development of democratic structures in America had begun as a concomitant to the slave system but ultimately acquired the character of a material force. But all along, it was
economic forces that led to the unification of the nation's ruling classes: "It was not, then, race and culture
calling out of the South in 1876; it was property and privilege, shrieking to its own kind, and privilege and
property heard and recognized the voice of its own." (Black Reconstruction, op. cit., p. 630.)
59. The notion of American exceptionalism or "Americanism" emerged in the American Communist
Party in the late 1920s as an explanation for the party's failures to attract a large following among American
workers. The weakness of the party was attributed to the fact that unlike European capitalism, as Eugen
Varga termed it, American capitalism was "still healthy." Since the "United States was an exception to the
rule of capitalist decline," the Communist International's Eighth Plenum in 1927 suggested it "expected no
great rise of the revolutionary labor movement 'in the nearest future.'" Theodore Draper, American
Communism and Soviet Russia, Viking Press, New York, 1960, pp. 270-72.
60. Du Bois's lecture at the Rosenwald Conference was substantially reproduced in the Baltimore AfroAmerican, 20 May 1933, pp. 2-3. C. L. R. James made a similar point while discussing direct democracy
before a Trinidadian audience in 1960. In contrasting the modern world with Athens during its democratic
period some zoo0 or more years ago, James argued: "Athens was divided into ten tribes or divisions, and
every month they selected by lot a certain number of men from each division. . . . And these went into the
government offices and governed the state for that month . . . I doubt if you could take thirty or forty
people today from anywhere and put them into some government, however small it might be, and ask
them to run it. It is not because government is so difficult. The idea that a little municipality, as we have
them all over the world today, would have more difficult and complex problems than the city of Athens is
quite absurd. It is thatpeople have lost the habit of lookingatgovernment and one another in that way. It isn't
in their minds at all." James, "What We Owe to Ancient Greece," in Modern Politics, bewickled, Detroit,
1973, p. 4.
61. Du Bois, op. cit.
62. In a letter to George Streator on 24 April 1935, Du Bois asserted: "I am convinced from wide contact
with the working people of the United States, North, East, South and West, that the great majority of them
are thoroughly capitalistic in their ideals and their proposals, and that the last thing that they would want
to do would be to unite in any movement whose object was the uplift of the mass of Negroes to essential
equality with them. . . . I regard with astonishment militarists who agitate against violence; and lovers of
peace who want the class revolution immediately. It is quite possible that there have been times in the world
when nothing but revolution made way for progress. I rather suspect that that was true in Russia in 1917. I
do not think that it is true in the United States in 1935. But whether it is true or not, Negroes have no part in
any program that proposes violent revolution. If they take part, they will make the triumph for such a
program more difficult, and they will bring down upon the mass of innocent Negroes, the united ven-geance of the white race. The result would be too terrible to contemplate. I am, therefore, absolutely and
bitterly opposed to the American brand of communism which simply aims to stir up trouble and to make
380

NOTES T O P A G E S 1 9 5 - 9 7

Negroes shock troops in a fight whose triumph may easily involve the utter annihilation of the American
Negro. I, therefore, attack and shall continue to attack American communism in its present form, while at
the same time, I regard Russia as the most promising modern country." Aptheker (ed.), The Correspondence, op. cit., pp. 91-92. Streator, in his reply, agreed with Du Bois that "The CP of USA is led by stupid
men." But, he continued, "it is nevertheless a working man's organization." He suggested Du Bois take
more care in the future: "You attack American Communism, but you do not send any of your students out
of Atlanta fired with the determination to work in the labor movement which you have talked about but
never studied." "I can also attack the American Communist Party-get the distinction-but I can do my
part in building the labor movement and in fighting Jim Crow in the labor movement." Streator to Du
Bois, 29 April 1935, ibid., pp. 95,94.
63. Du Bois's resignation from the NAACP and the editorship of The Crisis in 1935was precipitated by his
difficulties with the organization's executive secretary, Walter White, a man Du Bois did not trust or like.
The substance of the quarrel, however, went far beyond personalities or administrative quirks. One factor
was the impact that the emergence of the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA)as a mass
organization had on Du Bois's thinking. As a spokesman for the NAACP,DU Bois had been critical,
sometimes viciously so, of the leadership of the UNIA.(See his "Marcus Garvey and the NAACP,"The Crisis,
35, February 1928, p. 51, cited in D. Walden (ed.), W E. B. Du Bois: The Crisis Writings, op. cit., pp. 307-10).
But even in the early 192os, Du Bois was receptive toward the WNIA program: "[Slhorn of its bombast and
exaggeration the main lines of the Garvey plan are perfectly feasible. What he is trying to say and do is this:
American Negroes can, by accumulating and administering their own capital, organize industry, join the
black centers of the Atlantic by commercial enterprise and in this way ultimately redeem Africa as a fit and
free home for black men. This is true. This is feasible." ("Marcus Garvey," The Crisis zi (January 1921):11215, cited in Walden, ibid., p. 325.) By the early i93os, Du Bois had shorn the program of what he took to be
its distracting elements and was presenting it as the core of his own program for the economic progress of
American Blacks. This "sanitized" version of the UNIA program would prompt Harold Cruse, 30 years later,
to remark: Du Bois upheld the idea of a separate black economy as 'not so easily dismissed' because 'in the
first place we have already got a partially separate economy in the United States.' Yet he remarked in 1940
that his economic program for Negro advance 'can easily be mistaken for a program of complete racial
segregation and even nationalism among Negroes . . . this is a misapprehension.' It seems not to have
occurred to Du Bois that any thorough economic reorganization of Negro existence imposed from above,
will not be supported by the popular masses unless an appeal is made to their nationalism." Cruse, The
Crisis of the Negro Intellectual, William Morrow, New York, 1967, p. 309. It was Du Bois's advocacy of a
Black co-operative commonwealth that the leadership of the NAACP opposed. See Broderick, op. cit., pp.
169-75. (For Du Bois's program, see his Dusk of Dawn, Schocken, New York, 1968 [orig. 19401, pp. 197220.) While Henry Lee Moon suggests that Du Bois had fallen back to a position similar to Booker T.
Washington's, it is dear that this was not the case since Du Bois was consciously basing his plans on the
presumption of the "collapse of capitalism:' Dusk of Dawn, op. cit., p. 198. (For Moon's characterization,
see Moon, op. cit., pp. 28-29.)
64. For the UNIA and the African Blood Brotherhood, see Theodore Vincent, Black Power and the Garvey
Movement, Ramparts, San Francisco, 1972 and the forthcoming publication of the Garvey Papers introduced and edited by Robert Hill, UCLA.For the Scottsboro case, see Dan T. Carter, Scottsboro:A Tragedy of
the American South, Oxford University Press, London, 1968.
65. "Before our leaders can essay this new task they have a vast lesson to learn." "Our professional classes
are not aristocrats and our masters-they are and must be the most efficient of our servants." Rosenwald
Conference, op. cit.
66. As we shall see, Du Bois argued that the roots of the Depression of the third decade of the twentieth
Century were to be found in the responses of white labor to the freeing of the slaves. See Black Reconstruction, op. cit., p. 30.
67. Rosenwald Conference, op. cit.
68. All quotations from Black Reconstruction are taken from the Meridian (the World Publishing Company) edition, 1969.
69. See Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman, Time on the Cross, Little, Brown, Boston, 1974, ~20-29.
70. This is very close to a paraphrase of Marx's description of primitive accumulation in Capital, a work
to which Du Bois alludes frequently in Black Reconstruction.
71. See Philip Foner, Organized Labor and the Black Worker, 1619-1973, International Publishers, New
York, 1976, pp. 4-16; and Robert Starobin, Industrial Slavery in the Old South, Oxford University Press,
New York, 1970.
72. "[TI he white workingman has been asked to share the spoil of exploiting 'chinks and niggers.' It is no
longer simply the merchant prince, or the aristocratic monopoly, or even the employing class, that is
exploiting the world; it is the nation, a new democratic nation composed of united capital and labor."
"Democracy in economic organization, while an acknowledged ideal, is today working itself out by
admitting to a share in the spoils of capital only the aristocracy of labor-the more intelligent and shrewder
NOTES TO PAGES 1 9 7 - 2 0 1

381

and cannier workingmen. The ignorant, unskilled, and restless still form a large, threatening, and, to a
growing extent, revolutionary group in advanced countries." Du Bois, "The African Roots of War:' op. cit.,
pp. 277,281.
73. In the late 1860s and early 1870s, according to William Z. Foster (a historian who twice in his life
headed the American Communist Party as its General Secretary), "There was much good will between the
National Labour Union and the Colored National Labor Union, and if they could not establish closer
working unity between Negro and white workers, this was due to their failure to overcome a number of
serious obstacles. Chief among these was the NLU failure to combat the employers' Jim Crow policies in
industry. The white workers tended to oust Negro workers from the skilled trades, to refuse to work with
them in the shops, and to bar them from the trade unions. This white chauvinist trend which was to wreak
such havoc in the labor movement in later decades, was already manifest among unions in the NLU."
Foster, The Negro People in American History, International Publishers, New York, 1954, p. 351. A journalist
observing the 1869 convention of the NLU wrote: "When a native Mississippian and an ex-confederate
officer, in addressing a convention, refers to a colored delegate who has preceded him as 'the gentleman
from Georgia' . . . when an ardent and Democratic partisan (from New York at that) declares with a rich
Irish brogue that he asks for himself no privilege as a mechanic or as a citizen that he is not willing to
concede to every other man, white or black . . . then one may indeed be warranted in asserting that time
works curious charges." Quoted by Zinn, op. cit., pp. 236-37. See also Foner, Organized Labor and the Black
Worker, op. cit., pp. 30-63 for the history of NLU, the CNLU, the Knights of Labor and other unions; and
Herbert Gutman, "The Negro and the United Mine Workers of America," in Julius Jacobsen (ed.), The
Negro and the American Labor Movement, Anchor Books, Garden City, 1968, pp. 119-20.
74. See Du Bois, "Organized Labor," in Julius Lester (ed.), The Seventh Son, op. cit., 2:301-2. The
editorial originally appeared in The Crisis, July 1912.
75. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The German Ideology, in Robert C. Tucker, The Marx-Engels Reader,
W. W. Norton, New York, 1972, p. 128.
76. See Richard Lichtman, "The Fascade of Equality in Liberal Democratic Theory:' Socialist Revolution,
January 1970, pp. 85-126.
n.In 1925,one Black Marxist took stock of his society: "The slow growth of Marxism among negroes has
been wholly due to the inability both of the social democrats and the Communists to approach the negro
on his own mental grounds, and to interpret his peculiar social situation in terms of the class struggle. Today the American negro has evolved his own bourgeoisie, even though as yet but petty. And more and more
the lines sharpen in the conflict between the white and black bourgeoisies. The negro petty bourgeoisie
rallies the negro masses to him in his struggle against the more powerful white bourgeoisie, and the negro
masses are permeated with the belief that their social degradation flows from the mere fact that they are
markedly of a different race, and are not white. . . . The negro is revolutionary enough in a racial sense, and
it devolves upon the American Communist Party to manipulate this racial revolutionary sentiment to the
advantage of the class struggle." James Jackson, "The Negro in America," Communist International, February 1925, p. 51. This was not the James E. Jackson who was active in the American Communist Party in the
1940s and later, and who edited The Daily Worker, for a time; this was L. Fort-Whiteman, described by the
editors of the Communist International as "an emigrant [presumably to Great Britain] of the oppressed
negro race." Ibid., p. 53. George Streator put the same thought to Du Bois, but much more simply: "There
is no such thing as a Negro loving his race in the matter of capital investment and profit." 8 April 1935, in
Aptheker (ed.), The Correspondence of W. E. B. Du Bois, op. cit., 290.
78. Rosenwald Conference lecture, op. cit.
79. During the first decade after the Russian Revolution, the crises confronting the Soviet Union and the
world Communist movement were dramatized by leadership struggles in Russia and in the Comintern's
national parties. In Russia, Lenin's long and increasingly incapacitating illness, and finally his death (1924)
released the brake: "Although factions had existed in Lenin's lifetime, these had been transitory and their
members had frequently changed sides. [By 19251 the emerging alignment represented hardened positions
based on conflicting programs and slogans and was unresponsive to compromise or individual maneuver. . . . Above all, the sharp division among Russian leaders stemmed from the policy decisions, on
socialism in one country and the interpretation and implementation of NEP. . . . Within the Politburo
Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Trotsky assumed the left position Bukharin, Aleksei Rykov, and Mikhail Tomsky,
the right; and Stalin, the center, although he invariably allied himself with the right." Helmut Gruber,
Soviet Russia Masters the Comintern: International Communism in the Era of Stalinj Ascendancy, Anchor1
Doubleday, Garden City, 1974, p. 21. Gruber discusses the policies in question and the political developments, ibid., pp. 20-25,175-200; see also Fernando Claudin, The Communist Movement: From Comintern
to Cominform, Part 1, Monthly Review Press, New York, 1975, pp. 46-102. For the American factions in the
leadership struggle, see Benjamin Gitlow, I Confess, E. P. Dutton, New York 1939, pp. 493-570; Theodore
Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, Viking Press, New York, 1963, chaps. 16,17, and 18; and
for the political destinies of many of the participants, Daniel Bell, Marxian Socialism in the United States,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1967, pp. 133-34 n. 220. For Black American Communists and the
382

N O T E S T O PAGES 2 0 2 - 7

leadership disputes, see Harry Haywood, Black Bolshevik, Liberator Press, Chicago, 1978, pp. 176-91. For
examples of the discipline and opportunism shown by many leading Black Communists toward frequent
changes in the party's "line" see William Nolan's polemically anti-Communist but often informative work,
Communism versus the Negro, Henry Regnery Co., Chicago, 1951, passim; and Harry Haywood, For a
Revolutionary Position on the Negro Question, Liberator Press, Chicago, 1975.
80. Du Bois mentioned Engels only rarely, and then he seemed to be entirely wedded to the phrase
"Marx and Engels," suggesting an earlier critic of whom Marx had complained: "What is strange, is to see
how he treats the two of us as a singular: 'Marx and Engels says.' " Letter to Engels, 1August 1856, cited by S.
S. Prawar, Karl Marx and World Literature, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1976, p. 1. Marxist-Leninism,
the conventional designation of the Comintern's theories and policies in the post-Lenin period is identified
with the dogma and politics of Stalin rather than with Lenin. More recently, it is frequently termed
"Stalinism." See Perry Anderson, Considerations of Western Marxism, Verso, London, 1979, pp. 19-21.
81. See Georg Lukacs, "Class Consciousness," in History and Class Consciousness, Merlin Press, London,
1971.
82. The Writings ofLeon Trotsky, Martin Secker and Warburg, London, 1964, 6:336.
83. Engels suggested that those who followed him and Marx-the Marxists-were subject to dogma and
reductionism. For instance, Engels expressed his exasperation with "economistic" Marxists in his letter to
Joseph Bloch in 1890, see Robert C. Tucker, op. cit., p. 642.
84. "The Marxist orthodoxy of the Third Communist International introduced considerable changes in
the theory of class among socialists. Instead of deriving its theory from an examination of the actual
division of social and technical labor within capitalist production, there was a tendency to regard the
working class within a single dimension. The ideal typical revolutionary class was the factory and transportation manual worker, that is, the famous 'industrial working class.' Workers in basic industries, those
which produced means of production were the critical base of revolutionary class action since they
occupied the central position within the production system." "Part of the difficulty in the Old Left notion
of the working class inheres in the broad two-class scheme of Marx himself. . . the concept of the great
schism between bourgeois and proletarian constituting the structure of capitalist society found in the
Manifesto was abstracted from concrete circumstances and transformed into dogma by the Marxism of
both the Stalin era and the Social Democrats alike." Stanley Aronowitz, "Does the United States Have a
New Working Class?:' in George Fischer (ed.), The Revival ofAmerican Socialism, Oxford University Press,
New York, 1971, pp. 188, 189. In the same volume, Paul Sweezy took on those critics of Marx's theory of
revolution who "note that the proletariat of what has become the most advanced and powerful capitalist
country, the United States of America, has never developed a significant revolutionary leadership or
movement." "Workers and the Third World," ibid., pp. 154-68. Sweezy's position was that of these critics
and the earlier American Marxists who had relied on industrial workers for revolution had neither read
Marx carefully nor realized the true dimensions of capitalism: "In Marx's theory of capitalism, the proletariat is not always and necessarily revolutionary. It was not revolutionary in the period of manufacture,
becoming so only as a consequence of the introduction of machinery in the industrial revolution. The
long-run effects of machinery, however, are different from the immediate effects. If the revolutionary
opportunities of the early period of modern industry are missed, the proletariat of an industrializing
country tends to become less and less revolutionary. This does not mean, however, that Marx's contention
that capitalism produces its own gravediggers is wrong." "Ifwe consider capitalism as a global system. . . we
see that it is divided into a handful of exploiting countries and a much more numerous and populous
group of exploited countries. The masses in these exploited dependencies constitute a force in the global
capitalist system which is revolutionary in the same sense and for the same reasons that Marx considered
the proletariat of the early period of modern industry to be revolutionary." Ibid., p. 168. See also Daniel
Bell, op. cit., pp. 106-16.
85. See Franz Borkenau, World Communism, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1971, pp. 64-65,
84-93; and Bell, op. cit., pp. 102-6.
86. See Gruber, op. cit., chaps. 1and 2; and Borkenau, op. cit., chaps. 6,7, and 8.
87. This is the more popular rendering of the phrase found in Marx's "Contribution to the Critique of
Hegel's Philosophy of Right," which began: "Just as philosophy finds its material weapons in the proletariat, so the proletariat finds its intellectual weapons in philosophy." In Tucker, op. cit., p. 23.
88. "International socialism was in fact motivated by conflicting impulses and its policy was characterized by ambiguities which socialists at the time preferred to ignore. They found refuge in short-term
solutions and compromises, thereby avoiding the issues that would have forced them to take a stand. 'The
International's total inability to oppose the war' had its roots in the organization's many contradictions in
the foundations and in the theoretical weaknesses of a preventive strategy that determined the concrete
forms of socialist attitudes and policies. Based on the majority's view of imperialism, on an interpretation
which the facts belied, the International's ~acifiststrategy was characterized by marked contradictions: an
awareness of new stages in the evolution of capitalism; an appreciation of the immediacy of the threat and a
basic optimism as to the outcome of the crisis that ignored the possibility of a universal clash. The
NOTES T O PAGES 2 0 7 - 9

383

International's activities on the world scene were therefore haphazard and dictated by the seriousness of
the crises. Neither the equation 'war = revolution' nor the alternative 'war or revolution' was in the minds
of the leaders of the International." "It is impossible to say whether the leaders of the International were the
captives of their own myths or whether their reaction was the classical manifestation of that characteristic
trait of the Second International: reformist practice screened behind verbal radicalism." Georges Haupi,
Socialism and the Great War, Clarendon Press, Oxford, London, 1972, pp. 220-21.
89. See Borkenau, op. cit., pp. 161-70. For details on the rules of eligibility for the Comintern, see Nolan,
op. cit., pp. 4-5.
90. Nolan, op. cit., p. 4.
91. Nathan Glazer, The Social Basis of American Communism, Harcourt, Brace and World, New York,
1961, pp. 25-26.
92. Theodore Draper, The Roots ofAmerican Communism, Viking, New York, 1963, p. 31.
93. Glazer, op. cit., p. 22.
94. See David Brody, Steelworkers in America, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1960, chap. 1. Even
the militant Wobblies had difficulty with ethnic loyalties, see Melvyn Dubofsky, We Shall Be All: A History
of the Industrial Workers of the World, QuadranglelNew York Times, New York, 1969, pp. 24-26, and esp.
PP. 350-58
95. Gabriel Almond, The Appeals of Communism, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1965, pp. 141.47. Almond's study shared with many of those works written and published in the early 1950s-particularly
those included in the Fund for the Republic series edited by Clinton Rossiter (David Shannon's The Decline
of American Communism; Theodore Draper's The Roots of American Communism and American Communism and Soviet Russia; Daniel Bell's Marxian Socialism in the United States; and Nathan Glazer's The Social
Basis ofAmerican Communism)-a degree of precautionary concern for the extent to which American Jews
might be identified with radicalism in the highly repressive ambiance of McCarthyism. George Rawick,
who worked as a research assistant for Bell, Glazer and Shannon while employed by the Fund, commented:
"Nathan Glazier started with a thesis . . . the attempt of a whole group of people around the American
Jewish Committee and elsewhere to so to speak 'clean up' the Red taint from the Jewish community. And
that was a particular concern of Professor Glazer, it was a particular concern of Moshe Dechter ( 1 ) who
worked in the same office, it was a particular concern of Daniel Bell. . . . They started out with a thesis . . .
and the politics of that thesis and the politics of the fund for the Republic was very simple: We were going
to do on the Liberal and anti-Communist Left, do it ourselves before McCarthy and the others got to do it,
so we could prove that we had cleared our own house." "One of the things which constantly went on during
this period-much more important than the publishing of the books-is that all the people who worked as
part of this project were constantly engaged in the process of rehabilitation of people leaving the Communist Party, including Earl Browder." Interview with Rawick, Winter 1976. Almond's contribution was to
transpose political issues into psychodynamic or psychopathic phenomenon. See for instance his treatment of "Alice," pp. 282-84.
96. "The Second Congress of the Comintern issued an ultimatum to force the unification of the
American Communist and United Communist parties. When this did not help, the Comintern, in the
spring of 1921, sent a delegation to the United States, consisting of Charles E. Scott (the party name of Carl
Jansen or Charles Johnson, a Lettish Communist, formerly of Roxbury, Massachusetts), Louis C. Fraina,
one of the American delegates to the Second Congress, and Sen Katayama, the Japanese exile who had
become a Comintern official. This delegation brought the warring parties together into the Communist
party of America in May 1921." Draper, American Communism, op. cit., p. 25; see also Draper, The Roots of
American Communism, op. cit., pp. 148-281; for the pre-unification period, see Gitlow, op. cit., chap. 1.
97. "The most startling and significant aspect of the American Communist movement in 1919 was its
national composition. For the Communist party, the Russian members represented almost 25 per cent of
the total, and the entire East-European membership accounted for over 75 per cent. The English-speaking
members represented only 7 per cent with the Michigan group and 4 per cent without it. Though the
percentage of English-speaking members was higher in the Communist Labor party, it could not have been
very high if 90 per cent of both parties came from the foreign-language federations." Draper, The Roots of
American Communism, op. cit., p. 190.
98. In the late 1930S, Gitlow, one of the founding members of the American Communist movement and
a "Communist candidate for Vice-president of the United States in 1924 and 1928," would write: "The
determination of the Russian Federation to control the movement out of Russian nationalist considerations certainly characterized its early phases. When better contact was established with Soviet Russia and
the Communist International, the Russian heritage was not cast off, the Party did not become more
American, but instead more Russian." Gitlow, op. cit., p. 57.
99. See Bell, op. cit., pp. 108-11; Melech Epstein, The Jew and Communism, Trade Union Sponsoring
Committee, New York, n.d., pp. 252-53; Arthur Liebman, op. cit., chap. 8; and Glazer, op. cit., chaps. 2,3,
and 4.
loo. Florette Henri, op. cit., pp. 63-64; Theodore Vincent, having had some professional experience of
384

N O T E S T O PAGES 2 0 9 - 1 3

his own with a Black press (the Los Angeles Herald Dispatch), suggested: "[Tlhe UNIA press was virtually
the only free press available to black people in the 1920s and 1930%Other black publishing concerns were
usually tied to white money." Vincent, Black Power and the Garvey Movement, Ramparts Press, San
Francisco, 1972, p. 255.
101. Henri, ibid., pp. 89-90; and Vincent, ibid., p. 36.
102. "For a short time in the early I ~ Z O the
S , Garveyites held together an unprecedented black coalition
which included cultural nationalists, political nationalists, opponents of organized religion (atheists,
separatists, or simply reformers), advocates of armed rebellion, pacifists, women's liberation fighters,
participants in Democratic and Republican machine politics, a smattering of left-wingers, many who
wanted no contact with whites, and a small but significant number who wanted the UNIA to cooperate with
integrated civil rights organizations to end discrimination and segregation." Vincent, ibid., p. 20. See also
Tony Martin, Race First, Greenwood Press, Westport, 1976.
103. The modification of capitalism that could be found in the UNIA ranged from retail businesses to cooperatives. Garvey, himself, had strong hostilities toward capitalists on the grande bourgeois scale and
often seemed to publicly move toward a tentative commitment to socialism. "Much of Garvey's hold on the
masses was due to ideas not very different from some espoused by communists. Despite his firm espousal
of the race-first principle, for example, there was a persistent class component to Garvey's thinking. As
against the white race, he saw the need for intraracial solidarity but within the race he demonstrated quite
clearly that he identified with the oppressed masses against those with pretensions to more exalted status."
Tony Martin, op. cit., p. 231.
104. "Garvey was exceedingly pessimistic about the future of the heavily outnumbered black man in the
western hemisphere. Beyond the boundaries of the mother continent, he could see only "ruin and disaster"
for his people. Consequently, he asked that Africa's scattered and abused children be restored to her.
Garvey claimed that the 'legitimate, moral and righteous home of all Negroes' was Africa, but he did not
favor an immediate wholesale exodus from the New World. . . . Not all blacks were wanted in Africa
anyway. 'Some are no good here and naturally will be no good there.' Unwanted were the indolent and
dependent." Robert Weisbord, Ebony Kinship, Greenwood Press, Westport, 1973, pp. 55-56.
105. Weisbord has indicated, in part, the extent to which the American and British governments colluded
to destroy the UNIA'S influence among Black Americans, inhabitants of the West Indies and Africa. Ibid.,
pp. 57-82. Robert A. Hill in discussions with this author has traced J. Edgar Hoover's sly obsession with the
emergence of a "Black messiah" to his acquaintance with the UNIA in the 1920s. Hoover, as a young
bureaucrat in the Department of Justice was instrumental in delaying Garvey's return to the United States
from Central America in 1922.
106. Until quite recently, the most serious work on the UNIA and other Black radical movements during
the 1920s and 1930s was done by governmental agents: "There are two anthologies of black radical
publications of the World War I period; ironically, they were both compiled by right-wing government
agents. Attorney General Mitchell Palmer's 'Radicalism and Sedition among the Negroes as Reflected in
Their Publications' was published in 1919; and 'Revolutionary Radicalism: A Report of the Joint Legislative
Committee of New York Investigating Seditious Activities' appeared in 1920.'' Vincent, op. cit., p. 254.
107. According to Weisbord, Du Bois may have gone a bit further in his opposition to Garvey. Garvey
suspected Du Bois had helped to sabotage the relations between the UNIA and the Liberian regime.
Weisbord suggests that this might have been the case, and that Du Bois may have been acting on behalf of
both the American and British governments. Weisbord, op. cit., pp. 70-72.
108. Quoted in Jervis Anderson, A. Philip Randolph, Harconrt Brace Jovanovich, New York, 1973, p. 132.
109. Claude McKay, Harlem: Negro Metropolis, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York, 1968 (orig. 1940),
P. 143.
110. Vincent, op. cit., p. 19. Martin's work, Race First, has already been cited. Robert A. Hill, editor of the
Marcus Garvey Papers at UCLA,
is currently preparing the publication of what should stand as the definitive
collection of UNIA documents.
111. For the Brotherhood, see Vincent, op. cit., pp. 74-85 and passim; Martin, op. cit., pp. 237-46;
Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, op. cit., pp. 322-32; and Foner, Organized Labor and the
Black Worker, op. cit., pp. 148-49; Draper and Vincent, though both were in personal contact with Briggs
give different birthplaces for him-Nevis and St. Kitts, respectively. Theman Taylor's unpublished biography of Briggs (1981) should clarify several such discrepancies.
112. See Harry Haywood, Black Bolshevik, op. cit., pp. 122-31.
113. Vincent, op. cit., pp. 75-76.
114. Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, op. cit., p. 324.
115. Ibid., p. 506 n. 26.
116. Though the identity confusion of the early period of the Brotherhood ultimately came to be resolved
through its "Race Catechism" (see Vincent, op. cit., pp. 46-47) and the c ~ u s a ' s"Black Belt Thesis," other
contradictions, specifically programmatic ones, ~ersisted.Briggs, himself, represents an interesting instance of the individual significance of the social contradictions of the United States and the West Indies.
NOTES TO PAGES 2 1 3 - 1 6

385

Briggs was phenotypically European. Though once he and Garvey became political enemies Garvey would
accuse Briggs of being a white men "passing" for a Black, this ironically was put to some good use by the
UNIA."Passing" as white, Briggs bought a ship for the UNIA in 1924. This was a part of an attempt by Briggs
to reconcile the UNIA,the Brotherhood, and the CPUSA. This was three years after the Brotherhood had
been expelled from the UNIA by convention vote. Briggs, reportedly, was quite sensitive about his complexion, which may account, in part, for his severe speech impediment and the difficulty he encountered earlier
in locating a people with which to identify. Theodore Vincent described the Brotherhood as the "first leftwing Black nationalist organization and one of the first organizations to consider seriously a separate Black
republic in the Southern United States." Ibid., p. 74. Draper, on the other hand, characterized it as "a small
propagandist organization typical of the 'New Negro' period." American Communism and Soviet Russia,
op. cit., p. 325. These are fundamentally different reconstructions. For example, Vincent begins his identification of the Brotherhood with a long description of its role in the 1921 race riot in Tulsa, Oklahoma. He
stresses the role that the organization played in defending the Black community of that city and the pride
with which the Brotherhood identified its participation in late 1921. (The ABB at first seemed to deny any
role: "The African Blood Brotherhood, which is believed by the authorities in Tulsa, Okla. to have
fomented the race riot in that city, yesterday issued a formal statement denying that this organization or
members of its Tulsa branch were in any way the aggressors in that Tulsa disturbances. . . . 'An article in The
Times of June 4 implies responsibility on the part of the African Blood Brotherhood for the unfortunate
bloody occurrences in Tulsa, Okla. This organization has no other answer to make save to admit that the
African Blood Brotherhood is interested in having negroes organized for self-defense against wanton
attack.' " The New York Times, 5 June 1921, p. 21. Then, according to Vincent, several months later the ABB
began to appeal to prospective members on the basis of its role: "What Other Organization Can Match
That Brave Record?" Vincent, op. cit., p. 75. Draper, to the contrary, argues that the ABB "attracted national
attention once in 1921when it was falsely charged with responsibility for starting the " 'race riots' in Tulsa,
Oklahoma." Draper, ibid., p. 325. Draper finds it difficult to accept evidence of the Brotherhood's involvement in active struggle as opposed to propaganda. He goes on to describe the programs and aims of the
Brotherhood: "a liberated race; absolute race equality-political, economic, social; the fostering of race
pride; organized and uncompromising opposition to Ku Kluxism; rapprochement and fellowship within
the darker masses and with the class-conscious revolutionary white workers; industrial development;
higher wages for Negro labor, lower rents; a united Negro front." Ibid. This catalogue of purposes, however.
does not make clear the emphasis found within the ABB for the establishment of a Black nation. Nor does it
clarify the role that Briggs's notion of self-determination played in the formulation of nationalism in the
American Communist Party.
117. Draper, ibid., p. 323.
118. For Thorne, see Robert A. Hill, "Zion on the Zambezi: Dr. J. Albert Thorne, 'A Descendant of Africa.
of Barbados,' and the African Colonial Enterprise: The 'Preliminary Stage,' 1894-97," paper presented at
the International Conference on the History of Blacks in Britain, Institute of Education, University of
London, 28-30 September 1981.
119. See Haywood, Black Bolshevik, op. cit., pp. 123-24: "They espoused 'economic radicalism,' an oversimplified interpretation of Marxism which, nevertheless enabled them to see the economic and social
roots of racial subjugation. Historically, theirs was the first serious attempt by Blacks to adopt the Marxist
world view and the theory of class struggle to the problems of Black Americans."
120. Draper, American Communism and SovietRussia, op. cit., pp. 328, 508 n. 42.
121. Ibid., pp. 343-46.
122. Martin, op. cit., p. 239.
123. Tony Martin discusses Garvey's reaction to the report of Lenin's death in January 1924: "Garvey's
first response was a telegram to the all Soviet Congress which said in part, 'To us Lenin was one of the
world's greatest benefactors. Long life to the Soviet Government of Russia.' This was followed by a lengthy
speech at Liberty Hall entitled, 'The Passing of Russia's Great Man,' in which he called Lenin 'probably the
greatest man in the world between 1917 and the hour of 1924 when he breathed his last.' He expressed the
view also that the whole world was destined ultimately to assume Russia's form of government. He
presumed that the UNIA'S message of condolence would be treated with respect, even though 'unfortunately, we have not yet sent an ambassador to Russia.' He explained that Lenin represented the class that
comprised the majority of mankind." Martin, op. cit., p. 252. For Garvey's antipathy toward American
Communists, see ibid., pp. 253-65.
124. See Milton Cantor, The Divided Left: American Radicalism, 1900-1975, Hill and Wang, New York,
1978, p. 30; Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, op. cit., pp. 315-16. R. Laurence Moore
summarized the history of American socialism and Blacks in the early period: "American socialists at the
turn of the century appeared ready to champion the cause of economic and social justice for Negroes when
all other elements in American society were turning increasingly against the former slaves:' "Unhappily
what happened subsequent to the 1901 convention quickly called this progressive and brave commitment
into question. The Negro resolution [of lgoi] which to many in the party seemed a natural declaration for
386 NOTES TO PAGES 2 1 7 - 1 8

an organization dedicated to the brotherhood of all workers was never reaffirmed. At the 1904 convention
the party rejected attempts to write a similar document; and through 1912, the year the socialists mustered
their greatest strength in a national presidential election, the Negro problem was not again even discussed
on the floor of a national convention." Moore, "Flawed Fraternity-American Socialist Response to the
Negro, 1901-1912:' The Historian 32, no. 1 (November 1969): 2-3. Draper's summary of the early American
Communists and Blacks is almost identical: "The Negroes counted least of all in the early Communist
movement. Not a single Negro delegate seems to have attended either [the Communist or Communist
Labor parties' conventions]. So little was the Negro problem in the Communist consciousness that the
Communist Labor program had nothing at all to say about it. The Communist party's program connected
the 'problem of the Negro worker' with that of the unskilled worker. The basic analysis was inherited from
the Socialist movement: 'The Negro problem is a political and economic problem. The racial oppression of
the Negro is simply the expression of his economic bondage and oppression, each intensifying the other.'
The American Communists did not depart from this traditional Marxist attitude until the next decade. In
this area, as in so many others, the American Communists at first followed in the footsteps of the historic
Left Wing." Draper, The Roots ofAmerican Communism, op. cit., p. 192.
125. The most analytically imaginative treatment of this issue is Harold Cruse's, The Crisis of the Negro
Intellectual, William Morrow, New York, 1967, pp. 147-70. Cruse argues that in the first three decades of the
movement, the party's most successful period, ethnic nationalism defeated the attempt at Americanization: "It evidently never occurred to Negro revolutionaries that there was no one in America who possessed
the remotest potential for Americanizing Marxism but themselves. Certainly the Jews could not with their
nationalistic aggressiveness, emerging out of Eastside ghettos to demonstrate through Marxism their
intellectual superiority over the Anglo-Saxon goyim. The Jews failed to make Marxism applicable to
anything in America but their own national-group social ambitions or individual self-elevation. As a result,
the great brain-washing of Negro radical intellectuals was not achieved by capitalism or the capitalistic
bourgeoisie, but by Jewish intellectuals in the American Communist Party" (p. 158). As Cruse, himself,
suggests, Melech Epstein, a leading Jewish intellectual in the movement from the 1920s to 1939 (see Glazer,
op. cit., pp. 205-6 n. 86), inadvertently confirms Cruse's reconstructions, see Epstein, op. cit., chaps. 30 and
31. Arthur Liebman also complements Cruse's views: "The attitudes and values that Jews and non-Jews held
about themselves and each other, on the whole, proved to be significant impediments to the development
of a 'successful' Left in the United States. Given the long-engrained tradition of ethnic antagonisms in a
society where ethnic communities were and continue to be placed in the roles of rivals for scarce and
desirable goods, services, and positions, no political movement in this country could be free from the
debilitating tensions emanating from these ethnic rivalries. The problem of the Left was greatly exacerbated in this regard because of the highly prominent and visible role of the Jews within it. The vicious cycle
of anti-Semitism and Jewish chauvinism and defensiveness, divisive element emanating out of America's
cultural and political history, proved to be especially onerous burdens for the Left in America." Liebman,
op. cit., pp. 534-35.
126. See James Jackson (Lovett Fort-Whiteman), op. cit., p. 52. George Padmore was still using the phrase
"Zionism" to refer to the UNIA when he wrote Pan-Africanism or Communism, op. cit., pp. 65-82. For Jews
in the early American Communist Party, see Glazer, op. cit., pp. 42,147-48; Liebman, op. cit., pp. 58-60;
Gitlow, op. cit., pp. 157-61; and Draper, The Roots ofAmerican Communism, op. cit., pp. 188-93.
127. See Tony Martin, op. cit., pp. 24gff.
128. "Lenin was a mere name which had appeared so infrequently in the American Socialist press that
scarcely a handful of non-Russians would have been able to identify him." "Lenin's name seems to have
been mentioned for the first time in America in an article on 'The Evolution of Socialism in Russia' by
William English Walling in the International Socialist Review of July 1907. . . But Walling was far ahead of
his time, and Lenin dropped completely out of sight for several more years. The next time, in the New
Review toward the end of 1915, Lenin was listed as one of the signatories of the Zimmerwald Manifesto.
Some excerpts from the pamphlet Socialism and War by Lenin and Zinoviev were published in tale
International Socialist Review of January 1916,with favorable comment. It seems likely that this was the first
American publication of anything written by Lenin." Draper, The Roots ofAmerican Communism, op. cit.,
pp. 72-73, "The earliest meeting of Lenin with an American of which we have any knowledge is the one in
1905 with Arthur Bullard, a journalist." "There is evidence in the Lenin archives in Moscow that would
indicate that many other American workers had heard of Lenin and his activities before 1917.On December
1,1913, the editorial board of Appeal to Reason, the biggest Socialist newspaper ever published in the United
States, sent Lenin '16 two-page leaflets and eight 32-page pamphlets [which] comprise our list of publications to date.' A working-class club in New York City, on March 30,1914, sent 'the sum of 1437 kronen and
90 heller ($292.61), which is a contribution from the Workmen's Circle to the Russian Social-Democratic
Party (Bolshevik)' to Lenin, then in exile in Cracow, Poland. Late in 1915, the Socialist Propaganda League,
a left-wing group in Boston, sent Lenin a copy of its manifesto." Foreword from Daniel Mason and Jessica
Smith (eds.), Lenin's Impact on the United States, reprinted in Philip Bart et al. (eds.), Highlights o f A
Fighting History: 60 Years of the Communist Party, USA, International Publishers, New York, 1979, p. 342.
NOTES T O PAGES 2 1 8 - 1 9

387

129. Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, op. cit., p. 321.
130. V. Lenin, "Left-Wing" Communism-An Infantile Disorder, Selected Works, Progress Publishers,
Moscow, 1967, 3:351.
q i . For the context of Lenin's retreat from theory, see Claudin, op. cit., pp. 46-102; Roger Pethybridge,
The Social Prelude to Stalinism, Macmillan Press, London, 1977, pp. 4off; and Draper, The Roots ofAmerican
Communism, op. cit., pp. 248-51. See also Almond, op. cit., pp. 27ff, for an antagonistic appraisal of the
pamphlet as a party manual.
132. V. Lenin, The State and Revolution, Selected Works, Lawrence and Wishart, London, 1969,3:281.
133. See V. Lenin, "The Tasks of the Proletariat in the Present Revolution," Selected Works, Progress
Publishers, Moscow, 1970, pp. 41-47.
134. Lenin, "Left-Wing" Communism, op. cit., p. 350.
135. Theses and Resolutions Adopted at the Third World Congress of the Communist International, July 12,
1921.

136. See Alfred Meyer, Leninism, Praeger, New York, 1962, passim; and Arthur Rosenberg, A History of
Bolshevism, Oxford University Press, London, 1934, and especially the introduction to the French edition
by Georges Haupt, Grasset, Paris, 1967.
137. Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, op. cit., pp. 320-21.
138. Claude McKay, A Long Way from Home, Harcourt Brace and World, New York, 1970 (orig. 1937),p.
177.
139. See McKay, ibid., p. 180; and Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, op. cit., pp. 25, 67,
165-66.
140. Rose Pastor Stokes, "The Communist International and the Negro," The Worker, lo March 1923. For
Stokes, see Vincent, op. cit., p. 82 note.
141. Stokes, ibid.
142. Ibid.
143. See Harry Haywood, Black Bolshevik, op. cit., pp. 66-67,217.
144. Jane Golden died on the day of Haywood's arrival in Moscow. Ibid., pp. 153-55.
145. Ibid., pp. 229-30.
146 For Nasanov, see Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, op. cit., pp. 170, 344-50; for
Katayama and Nasanov in Russia, see Haywood, Black Bolshevik, op. cit., pp. 218-19. For Haywood's early
opposition to Black nationalism, see ibid., pp. 134-38.
147. Draper, ibid., p. 349.
148. George Charney could recall that even in the late 194os, the question was still unresolved in some
party circles: "The debate at the conference was animated, especially on the part of a number of young
Negro intellectuals who had emerged into recent leadership. They were men of brilliant capabilities,
trained in the youth movement in the South, some of them war veterans who, stationed in India, had
become avid students of its struggle for national independence. They spoke eloquently in support of the
doctrine of self-determination. They used Stalin's 'classic' on the national question as their authority, as
had Harry Heywood (sic),Cyril Briggs, and others who had represented the first Negro cadre in the party a
generation ago. We never fully resolved whether this thesis originated in the Comintern and was applied to
the U.S., or whether it was originally inspired by the early Negro nationalist groupings in the party and
grudgingly accepted by the Comintern." Charney, A Longlourney, Quadrangle, Chicago, 1968, p. 193.
149. Pogany is consistently portrayed as an opportunist whose enunciation of the Comintern's "selfdetermination" fine was the first inkling of the position the American Party received in 1928. Haywood,
Black Bolshevik, op. cit., pp. 256-68; and Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, op. cit., pp. 34749. The phrase, however, was implied by William Z. Foster in his Toward Soviet America, Hyperion Press,
Westport, 1932, pp. 300-306.
150. Unrepentant Zionists like Melech Epstein found this intolerable; see Cruse, op. cit., pp. 164-68.
151. Marx and Engels, The Russian Menace to Europe, Paul Blackstock (ed.), Free Press, Glencoe, 1952,
pp. 99-100.
152. Engels, The Role ofForce in History, International Publishers, New York, 1977, p p 29-30.
153. See Chapter 1for Marx and Engels on nationalism.
154. Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, op. cit., pp. 349-50.
155. J. Stalin, "Marxism and the National Question," cited in Draper, ibid., p. 344.
156. Draper, ibid., p. 355; and Haywood, For a Revolutionary Position on the Negro Question, op. cit.,
passim.
157. Stalin was a Georgian, and, according to Isaac Deutscher, began the development of his political
consciousness as a Georgian nationalist; see Deutscher, Stalin, op. cit., p. 6
158. For whatever they are worth, see the figures produced in Glazer, op. cit., pp. 174-75. More useful is
the excellent work of Mark Naison.
159. See Benjamin Quarles, Allies for Freedom: Blacks and John Brown, Oxford University Press, New
York, 1974, pp. 168-69.
388 NOTES T O PAGES 2 1 9 - 2 9

160. See Philip Foner, Organized Labor and the Black Worker, op. cit., pp. 6-10,
161. Raphael Samuel, "British Marxist Historians I," op. cit., pp. 22-26,
162. Ibid., p. 23.
163. Perry Anderson, op. cit., pp. 3-4, 50-53.
164. See Claudin, op. cit., passim.
165. Anderson, op. cit., pp. 19-20.
166. Milton Cantor, op. cit., p. 135.
167. Anderson, op. cit., p. 69.
168. See ibid., for one recent treatment of the divergence in Marxian thought. Also note that Anderson
has restricted his survey to Western and Central Europe.
169. See Robert Tucker (ed.), Marx-Engels Reader, op. cit., for the appropriate references to The Holy
Family (pp. 104-6); The German Ideology (pp. 111-64), and The Communist Manifesto (pp. 331-62).
170. See Marx's discussion of the French petit bourgeoisie in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, in Tucker, ibid., passim.
171. Engels, The German Revolutions, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1967, p. 29.
172. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction, op. cit., p. 611.
173. For Lenin's sense of the peasantry, see George Lichtheim, Marxism, Praeger, New York, 1973, p. 334,
or Meyer's Leninism, op. cit.; for Trotsky, see Isaac Deutscher, The ProphetArmed, op. cit., pp. 155-58.
174. Cited in Hamza Alavi, "Peasants and Revolution," The Socialist Register, 1965, p. 247.
175. Ibid., p. 249.
176. See Meyer, op. cit., pp. 126-43.
177. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire ofLouis Bonaparte, op. cit., pp. 123-24.
178. Engels, The German Revolutions, op. cit., pp. 33,131.
179. Du Bois, "The Negro and Radical Thought," in Moon, op. cit., pp. 265-68. This essay originally
appeared in The Crisis as an editorial in July 1921.
180. "The Problem of Problems:' address to the Ninth Annual Convention of the Intercollegiate Socialist
Society, 27 December 1917, published in Philip Foner (ed.), W E. B. Du Bois Speaks, Pathfinder Press, New
York, 1970, p. 266.
181. Du Bois, "Judging Russia," in Moon, op. cit., p. 273; editorial in The Crisrs, February 1927.
182. "The record of the Negro worker during Reconstruction presents an opportunity to study inductively the Marxian theory of the state. I first called this chapter 'The Dictatorship of the Black Proletariat in
South Carolina,' but it has been brought to my attention that this would not be correct since universal
suffrage does not lead to a real dictatorship until workers use their votes consciously to rid themselves of
the dominion of private capital. There were signs of such an object among South Carolina Negroes, but it
was always coupled with the idea of that day, that the only real escape for a laborer was himself to own
capital." Black Reconstruction, op. cit., p. 381 note.
183. Du Bois, "Judging Russia," op. cit., p. 273.
184. Du Bois, "A Pageant in Seven Decades," Convocation, Atlanta University, in P. Foner (ed.), W E. B.
Du Bois Speaks, op. cit., pp. 65-66.
185. "Karl Marx and the Negro," in Daniel Walden, op. cit., p. 399; editorial in The Crisis, March 1933.
186. "Marxism and the Negro Problem," in Moon, op. cit., p. 292 (orig. appeared in The Crisis, May 1933).
187. Alfred Meyer, op. cit., p. 169.
188. The response to Bhck Reconstruction was mixed. (See Jessie Guzman, "W. E. B. Du Bois-The
Historian," Journal of Negro Education [Fall 19611: 377-85.) On one side, Du Bois was praised for his
lyricism and scholarship and for having written a book that defied description by its grandness. Some of
his critics, however, argued it was not history. With the American Communists, the range was more
narrow. Abram L. Harris, a Black Marxist sociologist, critiqued Du Bois for an immature application of
Marxism as well as for racialism. (See Harris, "Reconstruction and the Negro," New Republic, 7 August
1935, p p 367-68.) Ben Stolherg entitled his review "Black Chauvinism," ( m eNation, 15 May 1935. p p 57071) and would have agreed with Harris on the advisability of instructing Du Bois in Marxism. The official
party view was presented by James S. Allen (or Sol Auerbach), for a time the head of International
Publishers, the party publishing house. Harold Cruse writes of Allen's reaction: "Between 1932 and 1937,
James S. Allen was commissioned to write four books and pamphlets on Negro affairs. The last one was
Reconstruction-The Battle for Democracy. What inspired this hurriedly written Marxist study was the
appearance, in 1935, of W. E. B. Du Bois's classic work on the same period . . . the most definitive study ever
to be written on Reconstruction from the Negro point of view. A good part of the foreword to Allen's book
is given over to a Marxist criticism of 'Du Bois in his praiseworthy Black Reconstruction' and his 'errors: "
The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual, op. cit., p. 163. Allen's task was to resurrect the working class movement
from the criticisms that Du Bois had voiced in his attempt to analyze that movement's historical weaknesses. Allen's work quickly replaced that of Du Bois within the party nexus. He and others also successfully screened American Marxism from Du Bois's theoretical revisions. (See Paul Buhle's comments in
"American Marxist Historiography, 1900-1940:' Radical America, November 1970, p p 5-35.) Thus the Left
NOTES T O PAGES 2 2 9 - 3 8

389

picked at Black Reconstruction until nothing remained but the narrative of Black legislative achievement.
The work of Herbert Aptheker, the leading Communist scholar on Negro Movements, began under this
discipline. (See George Charney's comments on Aptheker's made-to-order work on the Hungarian Uprising, Charney, op. cit., p. 295.) The force of Du Bois's work was more than the ideologues of American
Marxism required and, on the other hand, more than American academic history could accept. More than
two decades would pass before Black Reconstruction would again receive serious attention in either circle.
By that time, Du Bois was nearing his nineties and the American Communist Party had been reduced to a
sect. By the third decade, the shadow of Du Bois lay across American historiography.

Chapter Ten
1. Hollis Lynch, writing while his historical judgment seemed to match that of his subject too closely,
opened his study of Edward Blyden with the declaration that: "The nineteenth was probably the most
humiliating century in the history of the Negro race." Hollis Lynch, Edward Wilmot Blyden: Pan-Negro
Patriot, 1832-1912, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1970, p. 1. Lynch's justification rested on the persistence
of the African slave trade "despite the well-intentioned efforts of the British to stop it and the legal
prohibitions imposed upon it by European and American nations" (ibid.); and Negro phobia: "[Plerhaps
the greatest wrong inflicted on the Negro race in the nineteenth century was the successful building up of a
myth that the Negro was inherently inferior to other races" (ibid., pp. 2-3). But even more debilitating to
Lynch's comprehension of the period was his consistent belittling of Black resistance. Both the Haitian
Revolution and the resistance to the Confederacy by Afro-Americans were submerged in Lynch's mind by
fortuitous locations and developments. Of the first, he was satisfied to write: "West Indian Negroes were
fortunate in being the first in the New World to gain their emancipation" (ibid., p. 2). And of the second, he
claimed: "So entrenched was slavery in the southern United States that it took the Civil War (1861-1865) to
bring about its downfall" (ibid., p. 1). Indeed, Lynch's depiction of "the Negro world in the nineteenth
century and the making of a race champion:' entirely devoid of any reference to collective Black radicalism,
revolves around the dilemma of the Black petit bourgeoisie (the "free Negro") during the eras of slaverv
and the postemancipation. For them, no doubt, the period was an unpleasant one.
2. "It was . . . the absence of a manufacturing infra-structure after Independence, the development
of essentially feudal relations in agriculture, the struggles of the peasantry to remain landed and selfsubsistent, the growth of a landed rural middle class, the creation of a prebendary state bureaucracy, the
inability of any of the dominant warring factions of the ruling class to achieve a decisive and long-lasting
political and economic hegemony, and the penetration and dominance of foreign capital, which would
seriously block all attempts at the capitalist transformation and development of Haiti during the nine-.
teenth century." Alex Dupuy, "Class Formation and Underdevelopment in Nineteenth Century Haiti," 1981
(unpublished paper).
3. W. David McIntyre, Colonies into Commonwealth, Blandford Press, London, 1974. p p 152-53.
4. For the Morant Bay Uprising in Jamaica in 1865, see Bernard Semmel, Jamaican Blood and Victoriaw
Conscience, Houghton Mifflin, Cambridge, 1963; and Peter Abrahams, Jamaica, Her Majesty's Stationery
Office, London, 1957, p p 74-127.
5. McIntyre, op. cit., pp. 169-72; and Christopher Hibbert, The Great Mutiny, Viking Press, New York
197%
6. The Liberal Party, while in power, "had evacuated Afghanistan and the Transvaal, and had abandoned
Cordon at Khartoum to a death they refused to avenge. They had gone further and attempted to break up
the Empire. They wished to consolidate the Empire by granting the Irish Home Rule." Elie Halevy.
Imperialism and the Rise oflabour, A History of the English People in the Nineteenth Century, Ernest Benn,
London, 1961 (orig. 1926), 5:lo; see also McIntyre, op. cit., pp. 124-28.
7. Immanuel Geiss, The Pan-African Movement, Methuen, London, 1974, p. 66.
8. Halevy, op. cit., p. 11.
9. "[Aln entire section of the Liberal leaders, the followers of Lord Rosebery, were imperialists, and
during the three years of Liberal government the Foreign Office had pursued an imperialist policy." Halevy,
ibid., p. 8.
lo. "For the inhabitants of these islands at the beginning of this century the British Empire was for better
or worse what Lord Curzon described as 'a great historical and political and sociological fact which is one
of the guiding factors in the history of mankind.' Most of them (at least outside Ireland) seem to have
thought it to be for the better.. . .They would have been brought up in the nursery on the patriotic verse of
Robert Southey and Thomas Campbell. At school their minds would have been moulded by men with the
robust and simple-minded patriotism of Charles Kingsley and of William Johnson Cory, that vehement
enthusiast who taught so many future members of the ruling class at Eton, not least among them Lord
Rosebery and Lord Esher. From schools . . . this generation passed to universities where they came in
contact with professors like John Ruskin: Ruskin, who told the audience at his Inaugural Lecture as Slade
Professor of Fine Art at Oxford in 1870 that it must be the task of Englishmen 'still undegenerate in race; a
390

NOTES TO PAGES 2 4 1 - 4 3

race mingled of the best northern blood,' to 'found colonies as fast and as far as she is able formed of her
most energetic and worthiest men;-seizing every piece of fruitful waste ground she can set her foot on,
and there teaching these her colonists that their chief virtue is to be fidelity to their country, and that their
first aim is to be to advance the power of England by land and sea.' If they were historians, they would be
introduced to the works of Carlyle and Froude, who spread the same message." Michael Howard, "Empire,
Race and War," History Today 31 (December 1981): 5. See also, Brian Street, The Savage in Literature,
Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1975; Jonah Raskin, The Mythology of Imperialism, Delta, New York,
1971; V. G. Kiernan, The Lords ofHumankind, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1969; and Halevy, op. cit.,
pp. 18-22.
11. Halevy, op. cit., pp. 11-12.
12. "The peons [backwoodsmen of mixed Spanish-Amerindian-African descent from Venezuela], the
African immigrants, and the black ex-soldiers, and their descendants, were important groups in the
island's peasantry in the nineteenth century. But the peasantry in Trinidad originated with the withdrawal
of ex-slaves from the sugar plantations after 1838. Perhaps around 7,000 ex-slaves left the estates to become
stallholders. Of these, about five-sixths became owners of between one and ten acres of land, growing
chiefly provisions and cocoa, and often giving casual labour to the estates during crop." Bridget Brereton,
Race Relations in Colonial Trinidad 1870-1900, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1979, p. 138.
Brereton's study has been of particular use in the following descriptions of nineteenth-century Trinidad.
See also Donald Wood, Trinidad in Transition: The Years after Slavery, Oxford University Press (for the
Institute of Race Relations), London, 1968, pp. qgff.
13. The decline of sugar production in Trinidad during the 1840s and 1850s was also attributable to the
neglect of the road systems that connected the plantations and ports in western Trinidad. This neglect was
connected to the movement of ex-slaves-an attempt by the planters to keep their labor close by. Thirty
years after emancipation, the new governor, A. H. Gordon (appointed in 1866) and his surveyor-general
were confronted with the results: "During his early excursions Gordon saw at first hand the state of the
roads. Everywhere he found neglect. As he was travelling on the main highway to San Fernando a rotten
bridge collapsed beneath his party." "Gordon's response was prompt.. . . The Surveyor-General planned an
ambitious programme of new roads, not without opposition from some planters who feared that an
improvement in communications might drain off labourers from the estates." Wood, op. cit., pp. 268,269.
14. Ibid., p. 63.
15. Ibid. Brereton reports: "Victorians were preoccupied with the need for 'steady industry,' 'reliable
labour,' by the non-white races of the Empire-usually for a European employer. As the London Spectator
said, steady industry was 'in English opinion, the single virtue, except reverence for white faces, to be
demanded of black men.' The 'lazy nigger' myth performed a useful role: it justified the exploitation of
black labourers by the planters, and the neglect of independent peasant cultivators by the government."
Brereton, op. cit., p. 148.
16. For a fuller treatment of the attempt to recruit immigrant labor from the West Indies, Africa, the
United States, and China, see Wood, op. cit., chaps. 4 and 8. Of the liberated Africans, J. J. (Jacob) Thomas
(who will be discussed in the text) "listed the principal tribal groups sent to Trinidad as the 'Mandingoes,
Foulahs, Houssas, Calvers, Gallahs, Karamenties, Yorubas, Aradas, Cangas, Kroos, Timnehs, Veis, Eboes,
Mokoes, Bibis, Congoes.' " Brereton, op. cit., p. 134.
17. See Wood, op. cit., pp. 107-10.
18. Ibid., p. 158.
19. Brereton, "The Experience of Indentureship: 1845-1917:) in John La Guerre (ed.), Calcutta to Caroni:
The East Indians of Trinidad, Longman Caribbean, Trinidad, 1974, p. 32.
20. Ibid., p. 26.
21. J. C. Jha, "Indian Heritage in Trinidad, West Indies," Caribbean Quarterly 19, no. 2 (June 1973): 30.
"Conditions like these were part of the fabric of life but the Mutiny depressed them even further. Many of
the Bengal army were Brahmins and Rajputs from Oudh and the North-West Provinces; the campaign
ebbed and flowed over their homelands and battles were fought in districts which were centres for colonial
emigration. Sharp fighting took place, for example, in Jaunpur, Mirzapur, Arrah, and Allahabad; the 17th
Native Infantry had risen in Azamgarh in the first months of the troubles; and Cawnpore and Lucknow
were bitterly besieged. But worse for the peasantry than pitched battles and the sieges of towns were the
mopping-up raids and skirmishes in the villages; for them it was more like an episode in the Thirty Years'
War than a disciplined nineteenth-century campaign." Wood, op. cit., p. 148. See also Hibbert, op. cit., for
other details of the atrocities committed by the British and the rebellious sepoys.
22. See Jha, op. cit., passim. Hindus dominated Muslims almost 91.
23. Extracted from a colonial petition of August 1919, requesting the permanent stationing of a white
garrison in Trinidad, and cited by Brinsley Samaroo, "The Trinidad Workingmen's Association and the
Origins of Popular Protest in a Crown Colony," Social and Economic Studies 21, no. 2 (June 1972):213.
24. Ibid., p. 206.
25. Wood, op. cit., pp. 152-53. "The Tazia procession (Husain or Hose) was the biggest festival in which
NOTES TO PAGES 243-4s

391

Hindus also participated. In fact, from 1850s this festival became the annual demonstration of Indian
national feeling which culminated in the Hose Riots of San Fernando in 1884. A big flag is raised at the start
of the ceremony and the tazias (replicas of the tombs of Hasan and Husain, grandchildren of prophet
Mohammed) are led by specially trained moon dancers to the accompaniment of drum beating and 'gatka'
(stick) fighting. In the past fire rod dancing was also done, twirling a twelve foot pole with flaming rags
secured to either end. Even non-Indians have been taking part in the procession." Jha, op. cit., p. 31. For the
attitudes of Afro-Creoles and East Indians toward one another, see Brereton, Race Relations, op. cit., pp.
188-90.
26. One prominent member of the colored middle class, Dr. Stephen Moister Laurence wrote in his
memoirs concerning the language of British colonials: "When however we analyse the term 'native' in
relation to racial origin as well as place of birth, we discover the true explanation of many a mistake made
alike by British people in general and the Colonial Office in particular. This special class division must have
begun long ago when the East-that is, India-was the Colonial possession. Naturally, there were but few
English, and these were mostly constantly back and forth, so that the whole Indian people were referred to
as natives. This was perfectly correct, because they were both of pure Indian stock and of Indian birth. This
justified use of the term 'native' would be extended to the entire East, and also to Africa." "But when one
turns to the West Indies the whole question takes on a very different complexion, and calls for handling
from a very different angle." "If, instead of presuming that these factors in the West Indies had the same
significance or insignificance as in the East, British authorities had acquainted themselves with the difference, then Downing Street [the Secretary of State for the Colonies was once located there as well as the
Prime Minister] at least-not to mention religious authorities-would have made fewer mistakes and most
likely scored more numerous successes than recorded history has established." "The Trinidad Water Riot of
1903: Reflections of an Eyewitness," edited by L. 0 . Laurence, Caribbean Quarterly, 15, no. 4 (December
1969):U-14.
27. See Samaroo, op. cit., p. 206.
28. Wood, op. cit., p. 127.
29. Brereton, Race Relations, op. cit., p. 148.
30. Ibid., p. 164.
31. Ibid., chap. 8; see also D. V. Trotman, "The Yoruba and Orisha Worship in Trinidad and British
Guiana 1838-1870," African Studies Review, 19, no. 2 (September 1976): 1-17; and J. D. Elder, "The Yoruba
Ancestor Cult in Gasparillo," Caribbean Quarterly 16, no. 3 (August 1970) (cited by Brereton).
32. Brereton, ibid., p. 162.
33. Wood, op. cit., p. 136.
34. Ibid., pp. 157-59. "[Bly late 1870s the Indians in Trinidad had some good horses which won prizes in
races, and the best kept cows and between 1885 and 1909 they acquired 69,087 acres of land." Jha, op. cit., p.
30; see also Winston Dookeran, "East Indians and the Economy of Trinidad and Tobago," in John La
Guerre, op. cit., pp. 69-83 for the persistence of poverty among East Indians.
35. Wood, op. cit., p. 276. These crops were developed by enterprising East Indians early on to substitute
for imports of the foods familiar to the Indian diet.
36. See Brereton, Race Relations, op. cit., pp. 191-92.
37. Chinese immigration was halted in 1866 by the Kung Convention. See Wood, op. cit., pp. 160-67 for
details of the Trinidad episode.
38. "The French Creoles dominated the white Creole elite. These were mainly whites of French descent,
but the term was generally understood to include people of English Irish, Spanish, Corsican, and even
German descent, born in the island, and almost invariably Roman Catholic. People born in Europe, but
resident in Trinidad for many years, and linked by marriage to this group, were also by courtesy considered
to be French Creoles." Brereton, Race Relations, op. cit., p. 35. Trinidad had served as a receptacle for French
emigre aristocrats in the West Indies who fled Haiti and other French possessions in the wake of the French
and Haitian revolutions.
39. Ibid., p. 204.
40. See Wood, op. cit., chap. 14.
41. This process is described in Brereton, Race Relations, op. cit., p. 47.
42. See Laurence, op. cit.; and Samaroo, op. cit.
43. Brereton, Race Relations, op. cit., p. 63.
44. Ibid., p. 86.
4 5 Ibid., translation mine.
46. Ibid., p. 99.
47. Ibid., p. 97.
48. Wood, op. cit., p. 249.
49. For Thomas's background, see Brereton, Race Relations, op. cit., pp. 91-96.
50. Quoted in C. L. R. James, "Discovering Literature in Trinidad: The 1930s:' in Sphere of Existence,
Allison and Busby, London, 1980, pp. 241-42.
392

NOTES T O PAGES 2 4 5 - 4 9

51. Brereton, Race Relations, op. cit., pp. 94-95.
52. Ibid., pp. 92-97,
53. Geiss, op. cit., pp. 176ff. Williams's pan-Africanism was also anticipated in Thomas's experience: "J. J.
Thomas wrote in 1889 that he was 'familiar since early childhood with members of almost every tribe of
Africans . . . who were brought to the West Indies.'" Brereton, Race Relations, op. cit., p. 134. For his
enumeration, see note 235.
54. "J. J. Thomas was one of those who expressed strong race pride. He was only too conscious of the
extent of self-contempt and self-hatred among his fellow blacks in the West Indies. He saw how the values
of white superiority had been internalised, with disastrous results. One factor in this process, in his view,
was the education of young West Indians by white teachers. He thought their influence was 'to a very great
degree subversive of the national sentiment,' by which he meant racial consciousness." "There were
individually brilliant blacks. But there had to be 'some potential agency to collect and adjust them into the
vast engine essential for executing the true purposes of the civilised African Race.' " Brereton, Race Relations, op. cit., pp. 104,106.
55. Ibid., p. 94.
56. Both H. Sylvester Williams and R. E. Phipps raised the issue of the place of the West Indian middle
classes in the governing of their societies at the Pan-African Conference in London in 1900; Geiss, op. cit.,
PP. 187,193,
57. James, The Case for West-Indian Self Government, Hogarth, London, 1933, pp. 10-11. Colonial
officials, apparently, were not the only ones who might be shocked by the discovery of "civilized" west
Indians. Dr. Stephen Laurence observed: "Perhaps the best resume and the most fitting comment on this
question is the reply said to have been given to her Majesty Queen Victoria at her Jubilee [in 18971 by the
late Mr. Lazare [Emmanuel Mzumbo Lazare, a solicitor and conveyancer, born in Trinidad in 18641,
himself of pure African stock: 'Do you speak English in Trinidad?' asked her Majesty. 'Madam in Trinidad
we are all English.' " Laurence, op. cit., p. 15.
58. James, ibid., p. 31.
59. Richard Small, "The Training of an Intellectual, the Making of a Marxist," in Paul Buhle (ed.), C. L. R.
James: His Life and Work, a special issue of Urgent Tasks 12 (Summer 1981): 13. James's paternal grandfather
was the pan boiler, his maternal grandfather, Josh Rudder, was the engine driver. See James, Beyond a
Boundary, op. cit., pp. 17-19, 22-25. Both grandfathers had achieved positions normally reserved for
whites in the nineteenth century. Rudder, especially, achieved an expertise with locomotives that still put
him in occasional demand even in his late retirement. He jealously husbanded his knowledge from whites.
On one instance, having performed one of his miracles, James described the old man's reaction. "An
enthusiastic crowd, headed by the manager, surrounded Josh, asking him what is was that had performed
the miracle. But the always exuberant Josh grew silent for once and refused to say. He never told them. He
never told anybody. The obstinate old man wouldn't even tell me. But when I asked him [one] day, 'Why
did you do it?' he said what I had never heard before. 'They were white men with all their M.I.C.E. and
R.I.C.E. and all their big degrees, and it was their business to lix it. I had to fix it for them. Why should I tell
them?'" Ibid., p. 25.
60. Brereton, Race Relations, op. cit., p. 134.
61. Ibid., p. 167.
62. Small, op. cit., p. 13.
63. James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., pp. 25-26.
64. Small, op. cit., p. 13. "The game of cricket, therefore, in a real sense mirrored life in general in West
Indian society, where a similar dichotomy existed. Whites were represented in the top echelons of West
Indian Society, out of all proportion to their numbers in the population. They led and non-white West
Indians were expected to follow. Decisions with respect to who should play, on which grounds test matches
in the West Indies should be played, amount of entrance fee for games and hence profits, continued to be
made by the whites." Maurice St. Pierre, "West Indian Cricket-A Socio-Historical Appraisal, Part I,"
Caribbean Quarterlylg, no. z (June 1973): 8.
65. James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., p. 13. See also J. A. Mangan, Athleticism in the Victorian and
Edwardran Public School, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1981.
66. Samaroo, op. cit., pp. 206-7.
67. For an account of the founding of the British Labour Party during the first three years of the present
century, see Halevy, op. cit., pp. 261-81.
68. Samaroo, op. cit., p. 210.
69. McIntyre, op. cit., p. 132.
70. Ibid., pp. 133-34.
71. George Padmore, Africa and World Peace, Frank Cass, London, 1972, p. 235. For details of the African
and Black troops used by the colonial powers in the nineteenth as well as the twentieth century (until the
late 192os),see Padmore, The Life and Struggles ofNegro Toilers, Sun Dance Press, Hollywood, 1971, pp. 11120. Elsewhere, Padmore had quoted General Smuts of South Africa on the French use of troops: "During
NOTES TO PAGES 2 4 9 - 5 3

393

the first year of the war 70,000 black troops were raised in French West Africa. By 1918 Black Africa had
furnished France 680,000 soldiers and 238,000 labourers in all. We have seen what we have never seen
before, what enormously valuable material lay in the Black Continent." Padmore, Pan-Africanism or
Communism, Doubleday, New York, 1972, p. 98.
72. See Padmore, Negro Toilers, op. cit., pp. 117-19, for figures. Harry Haywood was a veteran of the
French campaigns and describes the experience of Black American troops in France in Haywood, Black
Bolshevik, op. cit., pp. 53-78. See also W. E. B. Du Bois's treatment in "The Black Man in the Revolution of
1914-1918," and "An Essay Toward a History of the Black Man in the Great War:' in The Seventh Son, Julius
Lester (ed.), op. cit., pp. 107-15 and 115-57, respectively.
73. Samaroo, op. cit., pp. 211-12. James was underage but he attempted to volunteer for the war effort
(but in the Merchants' and Planters' Contingent): "Young man after young man went in [to the volunteers'
office],and I was not obviously inferior to any of them in anything. The merchant talked to each, asked for
references and arranged for further examination as the case might be. When my turn came I walked to his
desk. He took one look at me, saw my dark skin and, shaking his head vigorously, motioned me violently
away." "What matters is that I was not unduly disturbed." James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., p. 40.
74. Samaroo, ibid., pp. 210-11. A more profound interpretation is provided by Fitz A. Baptiste: "The war
produced a price spiral for commodities and the British Caribbean, the commodity producer par excellence, tried to cash in on the boom as best they could. Some statistics for Jamaica reveal that, despite the
effects by 1917118 of the British blockade and the German submarine warfare on Allied trade, export values
were maintained, even though there were falls in volumes, owing to the general spurt in prices for
commodities, especially cocoa and coffee." "While a factor in this was clearly sheer exploitative greed by the
merchant categories in the colonial society, a more fundamental cause was the enforced shift of dependence for imports from Britain to the United States and to Canada as the blockade and the Battle of the
Atlantic began to register themselves in the Caribbean. . . . The extraordinarily high percentage for imports
from the United States [for Jamaica, 67.6 percent] clearly reflected some of the distortions effected by the
war and which were still continuing into the post-war years." Baptiste, "The United States and West Indian
Unrest: 1918-1939,' Working Paper No. 18, Institute of Social and Economic Research, University of the
West Indies, Jamaica, 1978, pp. 5-6.
75. Samaroo, ibid., pp. 211-16. "There were disturbances in British Honduras in July 1919 and again in
1920; in Jamaica on two occasions in 1918 and also in 1924; in Trinidad in late lg~glearly1920; in St. Lucia in
February, 1920; and in the Bahamas in December, 1922. The list may well be shown to be longer." Baptiste,
op. cit., p. 7.
76. See Small, op. cit., p. 16; and W. F. Elkins, "A Source of Black Nationalism in the Caribbean: The
Revolt of the British West Indies Regiment at Taranto, Italy," Science and Society 34 (Spring 1970): 99-103
(cited by Small).
77. Samaroo, op. cit., p. 219; and James, The Black Jacobins, op. cit., appendix, pp. 403-4. A very different
experience for Blacks in the various theaters of war was their own interaction: the discovery of their mutual
oppression. Claude McKay recalled his own experience in London during the war: "One club was for
colored soldiers. It was situated in a basement in Drury Lane. There was a host of colored soldiers in
London, from the West Indies and Africa, with a few colored Americans, East Indians, and Egyptians
among them . . . I went often and listened to the soldiers telling tales of their war experiences in France,
Egypt and Arabia. Many were interested in what American Negroes were thinking and writing." McKay, A
Long Way From Home, op. cit., p. 67.
78. McIntyre, op. cit., pp. 209-10. In his dispatches to Washington, the Acting American Consul, Henry
D. Baker, wrote from Port of Spain in December 1919 of the racial concerns he shared with Trinidad's
colonial officials: "[Mlention was made of an interview between the Governor of Trinidad and Tobago and
the manager of the General Asphalt Company [where a strike was expected and Baker had in place 'a
trusted coloured employee'] in the course of which the Governor allegedly stated that the Colonial
Government had no confidence in the local police force which was predominantly black and advised the
asphalt and oil companies to establish a white militia. As if to show that he meant business, the Governor
provided 25 rifles and 11 rounds of ammunition for use by the militia. That by itself, is a remarkable index
of the racist reaction of the authorities, backed by the expatriate and local white interests, to what was
clearly perceived as a 'black power' movement." Baptiste, op. cit., p. 12. Baker recommended to Washington: "intervention, preferably at the invitation of the British authorities, but, 'in the threatened massacre of white people,' to use his own words in a separate message, without it." Ibid., p. 13.
79. James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., p. 71.
80. Ibid., pp. 70-71.
81. Of the many recollections James has published of his friendship with Padmore, perhaps the most
poignant is the brief: "[Wle were boys together, and used to bathe in the Arima River, underneath the ice
factory." James, "Discovering Literature in Trinidad: The 1930s:' op. cit., p. 238, see also James Hooker,
Black Revolutionary, op. cit., pp. 2-3.
82. Hooker, op. cit., pp. 3-4.
394

NOTES TO PAGES 2 5 3 - 5 5

83. Ibid., p. 16.
84. Ibid., p. 31.
85. Small, op. cit., p. 17; see also James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., p. 117.
86. James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., p. 116.
87. "The ex-British colonials have got to break away from parliamentarism. I did it through becoming a
Marxist." Alan 7. MacKenzie interview with James, "Radical Pan-Africanism in the 1930s:' Radical History
Review 24 (Fall 1980):71.
88. Ibid.
89. For the publication of James's first major works including the novel, Minty Alley, see Robert A. Hill,
"In England, 1932-1938:' Urgent Tasks 12 (Summer 1981): 19-27; and E. Elliot Parris, "Minty Alley," ibid.,
PP. 97-98.
90. James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., pp. 118-19.
91. See Basil Wilson, "The Caribbean Revolution," Urgent Tasks 12 (Summer 1981):47-54.
92. Halevy, op. cit., pp. 211-12.
93. Stuart MacIntyre, A Proletarian Science: Marxism in Britain, 1917-1933, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1980, p. 23.
94. "This sour creed, imported from abroad, which refused to set before its adherents an ideal which
made appeal to the heart but was content to prove by scientific arguments, or what purported to be such,
the approach of a complete upheaval of society, at once violent in its methods, and beneficient in its effects,
repelled many of those Englishmen who for the past twenty-five years or more [before 18841 had been
approaching Socialism by other routes. In agreement with the Marxists to denounce a social order based
on the unhappiness of the majority and the war of all against all, they did not share the Marxian
interpretation of history. They did not invite the working classes to use violence. The formula of the class
war was absent from their vocabulary. Neither Ruskin, the man whose spirit inspired British Socialism, nor
William Morris himself, though he professed a species of anarchist Communism, was in the strict sense a
revolutionary. England had passed through two revolutions-the Puritan revolution of the seventeenth
century, the industrial revolution of the eighteenth-and their dark shadow still lay over the land. Without
recourse to violence, Socialism must teach the nation the art of being good, and happy, the cult of beauty."
Halevy, op. cit., pp. 221-22. Halevy's prejudice is his own, but the fact of the limited impact of Marxism in
Britain in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries is generally established. See, for example, David
Smith, Socialist Propaganda in the Twentieth-Century British Novel, Macmillan Press, London, 1978, pp. 410.
95. See Stanley Pierson, Marxism and the Origins of British Socialism, Cornell University Press, Ithaca,
1973, pp. 67-68.
96. Stuart MacIntyre, op. cit., p. 17.
97. For the Fabians, see Pierson, op. cit., pp. 106-39; and Halevy, op. cit., pp. 105-6 for Fabian imperialism.
98. Pierson, ibid., pp. 137-38.
99. Stuart MacIntyre, op. cit., p. 65.
loo. Neal Wood, Communism and British Intellectuals, Victor Gollancz, London, 1959, p. 23; and MacIntyre, op. cit., pp. 4-11.
101. See L. J. MacFarlane, The British Communist Party, MacGibbon and Kee, Worcester and London,
1966, chap. 7.
102. "From the middle of 1924 until the General Strike, the party's membership doubled, largely as a
result of its work in the industrial and trade union fields. During the miners' struggle of 1926 membership
rocketed to over io,ooo, only to start on a decline which became sharper as the party adopted a more and
more uncompromising attitude towards the Labour Party and the trade unions. By the end of the twenties
the membership had fallen back to 3,200, roughly the same figure as in the period 1922 to mid-1924. The
adoption of the 'new line' was the main factor which accelerated the rate of decline after 1928." MacFarlane,
ibid., p. 286; see also Wood, op. cit., p. 23.
103. Wood, op. cit., p. 51.
104. Ibid., pp. 27-28.
105. Stuart MacIntyre, op. cit., p. 19; see also Raphael Samuel, "British Marxist Historians I:' New Left
Review izo (March-April 1980): 23-24.
106. "A British radical intelligentsia, comparable to the long-established continental intelligentsias, did
not appear until the nineteen-thirties. In the main British intellectuals had always been Liberal or Conservative. Then between 1928 and 1933 a change occurred in their outlook. Just before the opening of the new
decade, G. D. H. Cole sensed 'a disquieting insecurity' among young intellectuals. Their pursuit of pleasure
ceased to be satisfying. A new seriousness came to the fore in the place of the former joie de vivre.
Increasing attention was given to politics. Whereas sex and aesthetics had been the major topics of
conversation, now everybody began to talk politics. As time passed the politics of the intellectual moved
leftward to socialism and communism. What began as a political awakening became a great radicalization."
Wood, op. cit., p. 37. For the impact of this movement on English historiography, see Eric Hobsbawm,
NOTES TO PAGES 2 5 5 - 6 0

395

"The Historians' Group of the Communist Party," in Maurice Cornforth (ed.), Rebels and Causes, Lawrence and Wishart, London, 1978, pp. 21-47.
107. See Stuart MacIntyre, op. cit., pp. 47-65; Alan McKinnon, "Communist Party Election Tactics: A
Historical Review," Marxism Todayz4, no. 8 (August 1980): 20-26, Henry Pelling, "The Early History of the
Communist Party of Great Britain 1920-29,'' Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 5th ser., vol. 8
(1958):41-57; John Strachey, "Communism in Great Britain," Current History, January 1939, pp. 29-31; and
Hugo Dewar, Communist Politics in Britain: The CPCB from its Origins to the Second World War, Pluto
Press, London, 1976, chaps. 7-10.
108. See Folarin Shyllon, "The Black Presence and Experience in Britain: An Analytical Overview," paper
presented to the International Conference on the History of Blacks in Britain, University of London, 30
September 1981, p. 7; and Geiss, op. cit., p. 201.
109. In the post-World War I years, American and British officials worked closely to orchestrate the
access of Black British colonials to the English-speaking metropoles: "According to U.S. immigration
records, the United Kingdom used up 43.9 per cent of its quota between 1925 and 1929; 22.6 per cent
between 1930 and 1934; and a mere 4.4 per cent in the 1936140 period. This left room, technically, for
considerable emigration to the United States from the British colonies in the Caribbean. However, this
never occurred or, to be more direct, was never allowed to happen. Through the issuance of visas, and the
requirement of substantial bonds, the United States, with the tacit approval of the British metropolitan and
colonial authorities, exercised an extremely tight control over the flow of British West Indians. The result
was a sharp decline in the numbers of British West Indians entering the United States after 1925. In
comparison to the average of thousands a year up to and including 1924, the average for the rest of the 1920s
and for the 1930s became hundreds a year. In 1932, for example, a mere 113 British West Indians entered the
United States." Baptiste, op. cit., pp. 19-20. Recall that this was a period of Black political movement in the
United States in which West Indians had played prominent parts: that is, the UNIA,the CPUSA,
the student
movements at Black colleges and universities, the ABB, and so on.
110. See Ian Duffield, "The Dilemma of Pan-Africanism for Blacks in Britain, 1760-1950," paper presented to the International conference on the History of Blacks in Britain, op. cit., pp. 7-8 (Duffield's
unpublished doctoral thesis, "Duse Mohamed Ali and the Development of Pan-Africanism, 1866-1945:'
Edinburgh University, 1971, is generally accepted as the definitive work on Mohamed Ali Duse.) See also
Geiss, op. cit., pp. 226-27.
111. The histories of these organizations have been reviewed in Geiss, op. cit., chaps. 14 and 17; see also
Nigel File and Chris Power, Black Settlers in Britain, 1555-1958, Heinemann Educational Books, London,
1981, p p 72-77.
112. For Padmore, Chris Jones, and Arnold Ward, see Hooker, op. cit.; and MacKenzie, op. cit.; for Dutt
and Saklatvala, see MacFarlane, op. cit.; information on Blackman has been obtained from interviews with
him in London, December 1981. Geiss maintains that as early as 1898 the Liberal Party was having
discussions about the possibility of a Black man standing for Parliament to represent "the Crown Colonies
and Protectorates, West Africa, West Indies, etc. etc." Geiss, op. cit., p. 178.
IU. See Geiss, op. cit., pp. 347-53; and Hooker, op. cit., pp. 48-49.
114. The most sympathetic interpretation of the actions taken by Stalin and the Comintern is that the
dismantling of much of the propaganda apparatus in support of "world revolution" and national liberation struggles in the colonies was necessary in exchange for trade, entrance into the League of Nations for
the Soviet Union, and the establishment of a loose antifascist front of "collective security" with the
imperialist and capitalist states. The alternative, it continues, was the prospect of a German war, tacitly
approved by those ruling classes in England, France, and America for whom the Sixth Congress of the
Comintern had expressed resolute hostility. Padmore, who early in 1933 had spent several months imprisoned by Nazi authorities in Hamburg, either was unimpressed with this rationale (a certain incredulousness was warranted; less than a year later, on January 26,1934, Stalin, at the Seventeenth Congress
of the CPSU,dismissed the threat of fascism to the Soviet Union and reminded his party that the USSR had
established "the best relations" with fascist Italy. Fernando Claudin, The Communist Movement, op. cit.,
1:176-771, or was no longer capable of loyalty to a world movement led by a leadership characterized by
Claudin (who was himself expelled from the Spanish Communist Party in 1965 after 32 years of active
membership) as suffering from "a deep-going sickness: atrophy of the theoretical faculties, bureaucratization of the organizational structures, sterilizing monolithicity, unconditional subordination to the manoeuvres of Stalin's camarilla." Ibid., p. 166. Padmore's most credible statement-he was later seldom
capable of the "political objectivity" regarding the Soviet Union with which he prided himself hereindicated a "betrayal of the fundamental interests of my people" (Hooker, op. cit., p. 31). Franz Borkenau
suggested that a strong contributing factor to the Soviet Union's rapprochement to the imperialist powers
were the struggles internal to the Soviet administration, Borkenau, World Communism, op. cit., pp. 388-93.
Geiss maintains that "most coloured communists or fellow-travellers left the movement" at this time. He
cites Padmore, Kouyaute, and Kenyatta as examples, Geiss, op. cit., p. 338 My own research suggests
otherwise. Discussions with Afro-American veterans of the Spanish Civil War have indicated that even the
396

NOTES T O PAGES 2 6 0 - 6 1

revelation of Soviet aid to Italy during the 1935 Italian invasion of Ethiopia (William Nolan in his Communism Versus the Negro, op. cit., pp. 135, 245 n. 90, cites articles in the New York Times, 8 and lo September
1935), did not deter them. lames Yates told me: "We didn't get a chance to go to Ethiopia much as many of
us would have liked to gone. But when Ethiopia was invaded and Italy overran it, those same troops left
there and went to Spain. This was a time and a chance for especially the Blacks to volunteer and get back at
the fascists that had invaded Ethiopia." Interview, 26 April 1978, Binghamton. Harry Haywood has maintained the same position. Interview, Spring 1977, Binghamton; and see also his Black Bolshevik, op. cit., pp.
448-49,459-60, and chap. 18.
115. lames, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., p. 114.
116. "When the war ended the black community in Britain was quite large, perhaps as numerous as
zo,ooo souls, and with the closing down ofwar factories they flocked to dockside areas, particularly Cardiff
and Liverpool. During the war, black sailors had earned good money in the merchant navy, but with the
demobilization of white sailors who had been serving in the Royal Navy, the blacks fell on hard times as
they were discarded to make way for the demobilized whites. Blacks were expelled from jobs they had held
for years just to make places for white men." "Resentment at blacks competing for jobs with white workers,
and reaction to black men marrying white women, finally erupted into racial violence in 1919. Race riots
swept such British cities and towns as Liverpool, Cardiff, Manchester, London, Hull, Barry, and Newport,
Mon. Reporting the Liverpool incidents The Times of lo May 1919, pointed out that the war had increased
the black men in Liverpool until they then numbered about 5,000." Folarin Shyllon, op. cit., p. 8.
117. In Berlin and Paris, American Blacks, for example, Ethel Waters and losephine Baker, joined French
colonial dependents; in Britain, the prize-fighter lack lohnson, and Paul Robeson, were contemporaries of
Learie Constantine and the Sierra Leone actor, Robert Adams.
118. See Makonnen, op. cit., p. 133; Padmore, Pan-Africanism or Communism, op. cit., p. 95; and lames,
Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., pp. 128-29.
119. Interview with Mrs. Veronica Sankey, zo July 1980, Brighton; Edward and Veronica Sankey founded
the Sankey Printing Company in Ikeja, Nigeria.
120. Makonnen, op. cit., p. 152.
121. Ibid., p. xvii.
122. See Geiss, op. cit., pp. 355,387-90.
123. "I became a bona fide member of the publishers' association, and proceeded to bring out a number
of pieces that needed publicity. There was a pamphlet by Kenyatta [Kenya:Land of Conflict],and a kind of
Socratic discussion between Nancy Cunard and George Padmore on the black man's burden [WhiteMan's
Duty],and a manuscript by Eric Williams [TheNegro in the Caribbean]." Makonnen, op. cit., p. 145.
124. Ibid., p. 123.
125. Ibid., p. 159.
126. Ibid., p. 124.
127. Ibid., p. 126. In Africa, "Europeans who attempted to live native style quickly went to pieces. Some
missionaries who tried this approach failed wretchedly. Many white men who let their standards fall in the
bush took to drink and self-despair, and some became so deranged they sought refuge from the immensity
of the continent, like wild animals, in lairs under rocks or in caves. 'Going shenzi,' it was called." reremy
Murray-Brown, Kenyatta, FontanalCollins, London, 1974, p. 47. Murray-Brown maintains that Kenyatta
while living in Britain was driven by similar strains, but resolved them by discovering a sacred tree in his
garden in Storrington, and "maintained communion with the spirits of his people through libations and
prayers.'' Ibid., pp. 214-15.
128. Makonnen, ibid., p. 155.
129. Ibid., p. 124.
130. See Iulian Symons, The Thirties: A Dream Revolved, Faber and Faber, London, 1975, chaps. 5-10;
Douglas Hill (ed.), Tribune40, Quartet Books, London, 1977, pp. 1-24; Neal Wood, op. cit., pp. 53-63; and
David Smith, op. cit., pp. 48-56.
131. Symons, ibid., pp. 56-57; and Smith, ibid., pp. 48-49.
132. Symons, ibid., p. 56.
133. Douglas Hill, op. cit., p. 3.
134. On Spain, Julian Symons recalled: "The rebels [under Franco] were being armed with German
and Italian guns and rifles, so that the British Government's declaration in favour of a policy of nonintervention was in effect support of the rebellion." "The policy of non-intervention, Stephen Spender
said, was 'more grotesquely, obviously and dangerously a support of interference by the Fascist powers
than was the arms embargo in the Abyssinian conflict a present of munitions and victory to Italy."'
Symons, op. cit., pp. 107, 108.
135. See Folarin Shyllon, op. cit., p. 9. Presumably, Shyllon is relying on the unpublished Ph.D. thesis
authored by Ian Duffield; see note 110.
136. Wayne Cooper and Robert C. Reinders, "Claude McKay in England, 1920," New Beacon Reviews,
Collection One, 1968, pp. 3-21 (reprinted from Race, ix, 1967). Cooper and Reinders recount: "McKay
NOTES TO PAGES 2 6 1 - 6 4

397

escaped arrest but his 'big black grin' [McKay's description] did not prevent the Home andlor Foreign
Officefrom preparing a dossier on him. In 1930 McKay wrote to Max Eastman that the English government
prevented him from visiting Gibraltar (McKay was still a British subject) and that a French official in Fez
told him that the 'British Secret Service had me listed as a propagandist.' Two years later McKay was having
trouble with the British Consul in Tangiers and was prevented from entering British territory-including
his home island of Jamaica. And in the following year he complained to Eastman that 'those dirty British
bastards working respectably in the dark' were blocking his re-entry into the United States." Ibid., p. 12.
137. See Hooker, op. cit., pp. 23, 43.
138. "In the Caribbean colonies, a clamp was placed on radicals. Butler spent much of the war locked up.
In Jamaica, Bustamante was also interned for a while under the wartime defence regulations. Despatches
from the American Consul in Kingston tell how the Colonial Government, in the face of local reactions,
took advantage of the power vested in it by the Defence Regulations to detain persons who were noted as
'bitter critics' of British colonialism. One of those detained was Wilfred A. Domingo who was described as
'a native of Jamaica who for some years has been resident in New York from which place he has taken an
active part in Jamaican politics.' He was removed from a ship taking him from the United States to Jamaica
before it actually docked at Kingston and placed in an internment camp. . . . It is not inconceivable that the
news that he was on his way to Jamaica was sent to the British authorities by the American and British
intelligence networks in the United States. Intelligence was one facet and an important one of the developing Anglo-American wartime collaboration in Caribbean defence, with the Americans in the senior role."
Fitz A. Baptiste, op. cit., pp. 45-46.
139. For a recent evaluation of British Marxist intellectuals, see E. P. Thompson's collection of essays, The
Poverty of Theory, Merlin, London, 1978; and Perry Anderson's sometimes specious rejoinder, Arguments
Within English Marxism Verso, London, 1980.
140. James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., p. 122.
141. Richard Small, op. cit., p. 17.
142. Robert A. Hill, "In England, 1932-1938," op. cit., pp. 23-24. Hill also provides a defense of James's
Trotskyism: "[A] large body of Trotsky's followers, not just in France but throughout the European
working-class movement, were genuine Leninists who, while not willing to tolerate Stalin's betrayal, went
with Trotsky because he seemed to offer a possibility of sustaining the revolutionary political principles of
Lenin. The cadres whom James became associated with in the Trotskyist movement were bearers of the
political thought and practice of Lenin and Bolshevism at its prime. Most of them could be classified as
Trotskyists only secondarily. From them James gained an immense knowledge of the internal make-up of
the revolutionary socialist movement and the special role which outstanding workers came to play in its
development" (ibid., p. 23). This interpretation of Trotskyism (and Hill indicates a debt to the work of
Franz Borkenau-see Borkenau, op. cit., p. 396) is only partially sound. It implies, correctly, the cult of
personality with which Stalinists were comfortable, and frequently attached to those they opposed (the
history of the Communist movement in Western countries is replete with "deviations" known by the suffix
"-ite"), but it also displaces Stalin and Trotsky with Lenin by the same logic ("bearers"). I can only guess at
what "outstanding workers" means, and if I have surmised correctly it suggests one of the fundamental
flaws in James's thought, one which will be explored in his treatment of the Haitian Revolution. Finally,
James, in his "Notes On Dialectics" (Allison and Busby, London, 1980), a manuscript that Hill had a great
deal to do with preserving, provides a much more historical interpretation of Trotskyism, one which places
that "phenomenon" within the history of the progressive development of the worlang classes. That, too, I
shall attempt to demonstrate later in the text.
143. Sylvia Wynter, "In Quest of Matthew Bondsman: Some Cultural Notes on the Jamesian Journey,"
Urgent Tasks iz (Summer 1981):54.
144. James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., p. 34.
145. Ibid., p. 47. For Thackeray, see Margaret Forster, William Makepeace Thackeray: Memoirs of a
Victorian Gentleman, Quartet, London, 1980.
146. James, ibid., p. 37.
147. See J. A. Mangan, Athleticism in the Victorian and Edwardian Public School, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1981. Mangan believes that Arnold's role has been overdone, but generally confirms
James's earlier treatment of the public school phenomenon; see Mangan, chap. 1.
148. James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., pp. 158-60. Grace, James declares, was the best known Englishman of his time, that is the last quarter of the nineteenth century. And James deplores the fact that neither
Trevelyan, nor Postgate or Cole in their histories of that century found a place for him. But when he
declared that he could "no longer accept the system of values which could not find in these books a place
for W. G. Grace" (ibid., p. 157), he was also, it would appear, coming to terms with a species of Marxism
that possessed neither imagination or political relevance. He had come to terms with the relationship
between culture, class power, and economic dominance that had reduced even Marx to a somewhat
mumbled admission of perplexity (see Marx on the Western ideal in Greek art in his A Contribution to the

398

NOTES TO PAGES 2 6 4 - 6 7

Critique of Political Economy). And James realized that he had gone quite far: "The conjunction hit me as it
would have hit few of the students of society and culture in the international organization to which I
belonged." Ibid., p. 151. Though it is difficult to get her to say it, Sylvia Wynter confirms James' selfassessment: "The co-evolution of new popular forms of social organization, i.e., trade union organizations, political parties, international organization, organizational forms of struggle for popular democracy
with the rise of the desire for organized sports all within the decade 1860-1870 provide the basis for the
Jamesian reflection on the complexity of human needs, for his implicit affirmation that the 'realization of
one's powers' at both the individual and the group level is the most urgent imperative of all . . . [it] was a
conjunction that hit James, only because unlike Trotsky he had moved outside the monoconceptual Labor
frame to the wider frame of a popular theoretics." Wynter, op. cit., p. 58.
149. See Basil Wilson, op. cit., pp. 49-50; see also Eric Williams's few comments on James in his
autobiography, Inward Hunger, op. cit.
150. See Thompson's "Foreword and the title essay in The Poverty of Theory, op. cit.
151. E. P. Thompson, "The Politics of Theory:' in Raphael Samuel (ed.), People's History and Socialist
Theory, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1981, p. 397.
152. James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., p. 150.
153. Ibid., p. 152. The residues of James's "Victorian" upbringing remain until this day and are given full
rein at times in this volume. Witness: "The Greeks were the most politically minded and intellectually and
artistically the most creative of all peoples." Ibid., p. 154. Hardly a considered or even possible judgment.
154. Ibid., p. 155.
155. Ibid., p. 153.
156. Ibid, p. 155.
157. "Wordsworth had said that England needed manners, virtue, freedom, power. Arnold saw that it
had power. Freedom for him was embodied in the first Reform Act. But manners and virtue he was sure
were absent and he was equally sure that their continued absence from the realm would end in the
destruction of both power and freedom. Mealy-mouthed generations have watered him down as they have
watered down Charles Dickens. Arnold was a man of tempestuous temperament. He was tormented all his
life by the fear that England (in fact the whole modern world) would be cracked wide open by social
revolution and end either in ruin or military dictatorship. It was to counter this that he did what he did. He
aimed to create a body of educated men of the upper classes who would resist the crimes of Toryism and
the greed and vulgarity of industrialists on the one hand, and the socialistic claims of the oppressed but
uneducated masses on the other." Ibid., p. 160.
158. Ibid., p. 162.
159. John Rae, "Play Up, Play Up," Times Literary Supplement, 2 October 1981, p. m o .
160. James, Beyond a Boundary, op. cit., p. 164.
161. Ibid.
162. Alan McKinnon, "Communist Party Election Tactics," op. cit., p. 23.
163. See Henry Pelling, A History of British Trade Unionism, Penguin, Harmondsworth, 1976.
164. See Alan McKinnon, op. cit., pp. 22-23. T. D. Burridge suggested one reason for the Labour Party's
new vitality: "Though the Party never officially adopted an outright pacifist position, a dedicated pacifist,
George Lansbury, was Leader of the Party from 1932-35. In addition, Socialist theory interpreted war in
economic terms as a clash of rival imperialisms-the last, most decadent stage of capitalism. Even towards
the end of the turbulent i93os, the Party's advocacy of the collective security doctrine owed relatively little
to the idea that the possession of allies would be the best means of fighting a war. Instead, much greater
emphasis was placed on the argument that a collective security policy would be the most effective way of
preventing a major war." British Labour and Hitler's War, Andre Deutsch, London, 1976, pp. 17-18. See also
C. L. R. James's very insightful critique of Labour Party politics, "The British Vote for Socialism," in The
Future in the Present, op. cit., pp. 106-18 (orig. published 1945).
165. Peter Blackman, who left Barbados in the early igjos, recalls that Du Bois was an important figure to
West Indian Blacks attempting to establish their racial identity in the post-World War I period. This
largely resulted from the appearance of the Crisis magazine. Interview, London, 18 November 1981. James
implies the influence of Black Reconstruction on his thinking in the 1930s in several places, cf. Nkrumah and
the Ghana Revolution, Lawrence Hill, Westport, 1977, p p 74-75; "The Making of the Caribbean People:'
loc. cit., p. 179; and "W. E. B. Du Bois," in The Future in the Present, op. cit., pp. 202-12. For Chilembwe, see
George Shepperson and Tom Price, Independent African, Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, 1958,
and C. J. Robinson, "Notes Toward a 'Native' Theory of History," Review 4, no. 1 (Summer 1980): 45-78
(Shepperson's response follows: "Ourselves as Others:' ibid., pp. 79-87); for Lamine Senghor, see Geiss, op.
cit., pp. 310% and for Kimbangu, Vittorio Lantenari, Religions of the Oppressed, Alfred Knopf, New York,
1963.
166. Makonnen, op. cit., p. 116. For the responses of Afro-Americans to the Italo-Ethiopian war, see S. K.
B. Asante, "The Afro-American and the Italo-Ethiopia Crisis, 1934-1936:' Race 15, no. z (October 1973):

NOTES TO PAGES 2 6 7 - 7 1

399

167-84; and Haywood, Black Bolshevik, op. cit., pp. 448ff.; and for the Caribbean, Robert G. Weisbord,
Ebony Kinship, Greenwood Press, Westport, 1973, pp. 102-10. For Italian imperialism, see J. L. Miege,
L'lmperialisme Colonial Italien de 1870 a Nos lours, SEDES, Paris, 1968, chaps. 13 and 14.
167. See Makonnen, op. cit., p. 114, for his impressions of James. James articulated his position in Fenner
Brockway's New Leader in an article entitled "Is This War Necessary?," 4 October 1935, p. 3. For the ILP's
position, see James Maxton and Fenner Brockway, "The War Threat," New Leader, 22 March 1935, pp. 1,3;
and Brockway, "What Can We Do about Mussolini?," New Leader, 19 July 1935, p. 2.
168. See James, "Is This War Necessary?," op. cit., p. 3; and the report of James's activity at the Spring
Conference of the ILP, "The Abyssinian Debate," New Leader, 17 April 1936, p. 4. For James's opinion of
Haile Selassie, see Makonnen, op, cit., pp. 114,184.
169. Geiss, op. cit., pp. 280-81. Makonnen recalled: "It is said . . . that a number of the influential
Ethiopians like [Workineh] Martin and Heroui. . . considered themselves as not being Negroes. In fact,
Ethiopians were said to have betrayed the same attitude when, after Haile Selassie's coronation, a delegation came to America. Dr. Workineh Martin was on it, and he refused to lecture even at Howard University.
And when the delegation took with them back to Ethiopia only two or three very fair-skinned Negroes, this
again seemed to prove that they thought themselves to be white people." "This apparent preference fbr
mulattoes, and the Emperor's refusal to receive the Garveyite delegation, made Garvey bitter about Haile
Selassie until the time of the former's death. It was one of the issues that George Padmore and I used to
fight him over, because at that time in London, Haile Selassie symbolized our unity in Europe. And yet
from the time of the Emperor's arrival in England, Garvey castigated him as a man who, instead of dying
on the battlefield in the tradition of Ethiopian leaders, had slunk away to England to find refuge; how could
such a coward, Garvey alleged, be the leader of such a great nation?" Makonnen, op. cit., pp. 74-75; see also
Weisbord, op. cit., pp. ioo-ioi,103.
170. James, "Fighting for the Abyssinian Empire," New Leader, 5 June 1936, p. 2.
171. Some colonial authorities would trace the disturbances of the late 1930s in the West Indies to the
Italo-Ethiopian War. In 1938, Sir Selsyn Grier would inform his audience at an Oxford University seminar
on colonial administration: "Repercussions of the Italo-Abyssinian War were profound and widespread.
The people ofthe West Indies saw in it an unprovoked attack by the European upon the African, and this
gave rise to a feeling of racial animosity." "Unrest in the West Indies," in Oxford University Summer School
on Colonial Administration, op. cit., p. 61.
172. See Hugh Thomas, The Spanish Civil War, Harper and Row, New York, 1961; Fernando Claudin, op.
cit., pp. 210-42; and Julian Symons, op. cit., pp. 106-22.
173. There were five brigades: the Eleventh, German, known as the Thaelmann Brigade the Twelfth,
Italian, known as the Garibaldis; the Thirteenth, pan-Slavic, known as the Dombrowski Brigade; the
Fourteenth, French and Belgian; and the Fifteenth, consisting of British (English, Canadians, and Irish),
American (the Abraham Lincoln Battalion), Caribbean, Central and South American (59th Spanish Battalion) volunteers. See Joseph Brandt (ed.), Black Americans in the Spanish People's War Against Fascism,
1936-1939, New Outlook Publishers, New York, n.d. [i979?]; "A Negro Nurse in Republican Spain," The
Negro Committee to Aid Spain, New York, 1938 (reissued by Veterans of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade,
1977); Salaria Kee (now O'Reilly) was the subject; Haywood, Black Bolshevik, op. cit., chap. 18; and
interviews with Haywood (Santa Barbara, 6 February 1980) and James Yates (Binghamton, 26 April 1978),
both Black veterans of Spain. Brandt estimates that between 80 and loo Black Americans volunteered for
the Spanish Civil War. For Nyabongo, a Ugandan who fought with the antifascists in Spain, see Kenneth
King's note in Makonnen, op. cit., p. 176 n. 16.
174. For the disturbances in Trinidad, see Eric Williams, History of the People of Trinidad and Tobago,
People's National Movement Publishing Co., Port-of-Spain, 1962, pp. 232-42, and Brinsley Samaroo,
"Politics and Afro-Indian Relations in Trinidad" in J. La Guerre, op. cit., pp. 84-97; for Jamaica, see Ken
Post, Arise Ye Starvelings: The Jamaican Labour Rebellion of 1938 and Its Aftermath, Martinus Nijhoff, The
Hague, 1978.
175. Cited in Geiss, op. cit., p. 346.
176. This was the position that James would espouse in his meetings with Trotsky in Mexico in 1939. See
James, "The Revolutionary Answer to the Negro Problem in the USA,' in The Future in the Present, op. cit.,
pp. 119-27. For the discussions with Trotsky at Coyocan, see George Breitman (ed.), Leon Trotsky on Black
Nationalism and Self-Determination, Merit Publishers, New York, 1972, pp. 24-48; Tony Martin, "C. L. R.
James and the RaceIClass Question," Race 2 (1972): 183-93; and Paul Buhle, "Marxism in the U.S.A.," in
Urgent Tasks 12 (Summer 1981):28-39.
177. James, " 'Civilising' the 'Blacks,' " New Leader, 29 May 1936, p. 5.
178. Robert Hill adds an interesting and provocative element to the analysis of James's development of
consciousness: "At a very profound and fundamental level, Robeson as a man shattered James's colonial
conception of the Black Physique. In its place the magnificent stature of Robeson gave to him a new
appreciation of the powerful and extraordinary capacities which the African possessed, in both head and

400

NOTES TO PAGES 2 7 1 - 7 3

body. Robeson broke the mould in which the West Indian conception of physical personality in James had
been formed. That was a time when Black West Indians grew up with an unconscious prototype of the
white Englishman and white Englishwoman as their absolute standards of physical perfection and development. James's encounter with Robeson was nowhere more profound than in its forcing him to abandon
these inherited values." "Thus, it is the contention of the present writer that TheBlack Jacobins would have
been significantly different in quality in the absence of James's relationship to Robeson." "In England,
1932-38," op. cit., pp. 24-25. James met Robeson in 1936 and the latter performed the title role in a
production of James's play, Toussaint L'Ouverture. Dorothy Butler Gilliam, in her biography of Robeson,
puts the meeting and the production of the play at Westminster Theatre in early 1936, see Gilliam, Paul
Robeson: All-American, New Republic Books, Washington, D.C., 1976, pp. 87-88. For James's view of
Robeson's Marxism, see ibid., p. 127; and James, "Paul Robeson: Black Star:' in Spheres ofExistence, op. cit.,
pp. 261-62.
179. See James's criticisms of Padmore on this issue, Nkmah and the Ghana Revolution, op. cit., p. 63; for
Kenyatta, see Murray-Brown, op. cit., p. 221.
180. James, ibid., pp. 69, 71. For James in the United States, see Martin, "C. L. R. James and the
RaceIClass Question:' op. cit., pp. 184-85; and Buhle, "Marxism in the U.S.A.:' op. cit., passim.
181. These views were summarized in the final resolutions passed by the Fifth Pan-African Congress in
Manchester, 1945: "The first of these, 'The Challenge to the Colonial Powers,' took an intermediate line
between the revolutionary impatience of Padmore and Nkrumah on the one hand and Du Bois's more
cautious conception of 1944 on the other. 'The delegates to the Fifth Pan-African Congress believe in
peace. . . . Yet if the Western world is still determined to rule mankind by force then Africans, as a last
resort, may have to appeal to force in the effort to achieve Freedom, even if force destroys them and the
world.' The second general statement was the 'Declaration to the Colonial Workers, Farmers and Intellectuals,' drafted by Nkrumah, which expresses once again the limitless desire for independence: against
imperialist exploitation the colonial peoples should concentrate upon winning political power, and for this
an effective organization was essential. The tactics recommended were strikes and boycotts-non-violent
methods of struggle." Geiss, op. cit., p. 407.
182. James, Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution, op. cit., pp. 73-74.
183. As recently as 1977, James was declaring: "The man at the helm is the African intellectual. He
succeeds-or independent Africa sinks: unlike Britain in the seventeenth and France in the eighteenth
centuries, there is no class on which the nation falls back after the intellectuals have led the revolution as far
as it can go:' Ibid., p. 15.
184. Azinna Nwafor, in one of the most forceful critiques of the Pan-African movement, sees the
Manchester conference as one of the more progressive moments in Pan-Africanism. Nevertheless, Nwafor
concludes: "Pan-Africanism did not offer a revolutionary choice to the emancipation of Africa from its
centuries of conquest, domination, and colonial exploitation. The necessarily progressive role which the
movement played in the evolution of Africa to independent status should not be underestimated, but the
severe limitations of the scope and method are such that it contributed in no small degree to the disarray of
the contemporary African scene and the general disenchantment with the fruits of political independence.
It would seem that the storm centres of popular uprising for African emancipation were in fact headed off
with the aid of Pan-Africanists, who represented themselves to the colonial authorities as the only forces
capable of curbing the violence of the masses." "In many respects the OAU [the Organization of African
Unity] is the culmination and embodiment of that Pan-Africanism which Padmore has chronicled. Starting as a political movement in exile, and handed on to a group of aspiring and dedicated African leadership
who led their several countries to political independence, Pan-Africanism had been a movement carried
out over the heads and at the expense of the African peoples themselves. At Addis Ababa [in 19631 this
breed of African leadership determined to constitute itself as a new kind of Holy Alliance to preserve the
existing status quo which they had inherited from their colonial masters. Their abhorrence of political
revolution is total. As one of them stated, with brutal frankness: 'Speaking for ourselves, we prefer things as
they are.' " Nwafor's "Introduction" to the 1972 reissue of Padmore's Pan-Africanism or Communism, op.
cit. pp. xxxvii-xxxviii, xxxix-xl.
185. James, The Black Jacobins, op. cit., pp. 375-76. Subsequent pagination during the discussion of the
work will be cited in text.
186. Cabral, "The Weapon of Theory," in Revolution in Guinea, Monthly Review Press, New York, 1969,
p. 102. Earlier in the same address (given at a Tricontinental Conference in Havana, Cuba, January 1966),
Cabral had asked: "[Dloes history begin only with the development of the phenomenon of 'class,' and
consequently of class struggle? To reply in the affirmative would be to place outside history the whole
period of life of human groups from the discovery of hunting, and later of nomadic and sedentary
agriculture, to the organisation of herds and the private appropriation of land. It would also be to
consider-and this we refuse to accept-that various human groups in Africa, Asia and Latin America were
living without history, or outside history, at the time when they were subjected to the yoke of imperialism.

NOTES T O PAGES 2 7 3 - 7 6

401

It would be to consider that the peoples of our countries, such as the Balantes of Guinea, the Coaniamas of
Angola and the Macondes of Mozambique, are still living today-if we abstract the slight influence of
colonialism to which they have been subjected-outside history, or that they have no history." Ibid. p. 95.
187. Marx, Engels, Lenin, and Trotsky were bourgeois ideologists in terms of their social origins and
educations. Marx and Engels had seemingly acknowledged this in The Communist Manifesto: "[Slo now a
portion of the bourgeoisie goes over to the proletariat, and in particular, a portion of the bourgeois
ideologists, who have raised themselves to the level of comprehending theoretically the historical movement as a whole." Furthermore, with the exception of Engels, none of them seems to have given over much
time to the study of working classes. For the most part their works were concentrated on the bourgeoisies:
their histories, their States and administrations, their organization of production, their ideologies and
philosophies. All, of course, certainly looked closely at the historical and social processes of the breakdown
of societies, viz. revolutions, but these were the contradictions of bourgeois societies. It was also the case
that few proletarian intellectuals were ever attended to in their writings. This raises again the question: Is
Marxism a theory for the proletariat or of the proletariat? One American Marxist has answered the
question in this way: "While in their practice Marxists have often tried to take account of the praxis of the
proletariat, their theory proves a hindrance." Dick Howard, The Marxian Legacy, Macmillan, London,
1977, p. 274. E. P. Thompson seems to have come to similar conclusions in The Making of the English
Working Class, op. cit., and The Poverty of Theory, op. cit.
188. In 1949, Cornelius Castoriadis wrote in "The Relations of Production in Russia": "The dictatorship
ofthe proletariat cannot be simply the political dictatorship; it must be above all the economic dictatorship
of the proletariat, for otherwise it will only be a mask for the dictatorship of the bureaucracy." Cited by
Dick Howard, op. cit., p. 266. Castoriadis has proven to be one of the most consistently critical Marxists.
His conclusions followed those of James made ten years earlier in World Revolution, 1917-1936: The Rise and
Fall of the Communist International, Martin Secker and Warburg, London, 1937. Interestingly enough,
Oliver C. Cox, writing in 1948, had not yet found it possible to hone his considerably acute and critical eye
on the Russian state: see Caste, Class and Race, Monthly Review Press, New York, 1948, chap. 11.
189. James, "The Making of the Caribbean People," op. cit., p. 180.
190. This is the position taken by Robert Lacerte, "Xenophobia and Economic Decline: The Haitian
Case, 1820-18433' The Americas 37, no. 4 (April 1981): 499-515.
191. Marvin and Anne Holloway reissued the book in 1969 through their Drum and Spear Press. This
version was entitled A History of Pan-African Revolt and included an "epilogue" which detailed Black
movements between 1939 and 1969.
192. David Widgery notes: "As disaster overwhelmed the German Left, and Stalin switched to the
desperate alliance-mongering of the Popular Front, James-now the editor of the Revolutionary Socialist
League's paper, Fight made regular clandestine visits to the Paris exile grouping of revolutionaries around
Trotsky. 'They were very serious days,' James admonishes, inflecting the adjective 'serious' as only an oldtime Trotskyist can. 'There was a German boy very active in our movement. One day we found him at the
bottom of Seine.' " "James was, with D. D. Harber, the British delegation to the founding conference of the
Trotskyist Fourth International in 1938. This tiny body was established with the hope that, in the holocaust
to come, a clearsighted International might find a way through the chaos. But Trotsky and, effectively,
Trotskyism succumbed to the terrible repression." "A Meeting with Comrade James:' Urgent Tasks iz
(Summer 1981):116.
193. Tony Martin, for one, believes that James was disciplined by Trotsky on the "Negro Problem" to
good purpose. See Martin, "C. L. R. James and the RacelClass Question:' op. cit., pp. 27-28. What is
purported to be three direct transcripts of the discussions between James, Trotsky, and others have been
published as Leon Trotsky on Black Nationalism and Self-Determination, George Breitman (ed.), Merit
Publishers, New York, 1967. Some flavor of the exchanges can be found in their remarks on Black selfdetermination:
"Johnson: I am very glad that we have had this discussion, because I agree with you entirely. It seems to
be the idea in America that we should advocate it as the CP has done. You seem to think that there is a
greater possibility of the Negroes' wanting self-determination than I think is probable. But we have a
hundred percent agreement on the idea which you have put forward that we should be neutral in the
development.
Trotsky: It is the word 'reactionary' that bothers me.
Johnson: Let me quote from the document [Johnson's position paper]: 'If he wanted self-determination,
then however reactionary it might be in every other respect, it would be the business of the revolutionary
party to raise that slogan. I consider the idea of separating as a step backward so far as a socialist society is
concerned. If the white workers extend a hand to the Negro, he will not want self-determination.
Trotsky: It is too abstract, because the realization of this slogan can be reached only as the 13 or 14 million
Negroes feel that the domination by the whites is terminated. To fight for the possibility of realizing an
independent state is a sign of great moral and political awakening. It would be a tremendous revolutionary
step.
402

N O T E S TO PAGES 2 7 6 - 7 9

This ascendancy would immediately have the best economic consequences." Ibid., pp. 31-32. "Johnson"
was of course James.
194. For some of his experience in the Missouri work, see James, "The Revolutionary Answer to the
Negro Problem in the USA," and "Down with Starvation Wages in South-East Missouri," in The Future in
the Present, op. cit.
195. Notes on Dialectics (Allison and Busby, London, 1980) was in the original a series of letters from
James to his associates in the Johnson-Forest organization (see below). According to Robert A. Hill
(personal communication) they were known as the "caretaker" papers. David Widgery quotes Tames as
saying the letters were "written in Reno when I was seeing about a divorce." Widgery, op. cit., p. 116. Hill, in
collaboration with the Detroit-based Friends of Facing Reality group (whose nucleus was the older
members of the Johnson-Forest organization), edited the letters into book form in 1966. For some of the
history of the Detroit group, see Dan Georgakas, "Young Detroit radicals, 1955-1965:' Urgent Tasks 12
(Summer 1981): 89-94.
196. "Although the Communist Party reached its numerical peak of 80,000 during wartime, it had
become a virtual agent of State Capitalism in Russia and America, as its bitter opposition to A. Philip
Randolph's planned March On Washington, its avid support of the No Strike Pledge and of the Minneapolis Trotskyists' prosecution by the government all attested. Interlocked with the Red Army invasion
of postwar Eastern Europe-'Revolution from the Tank Turret' carried out with the imprisonment or
murder of opposing radical and democratic forces as if no other form of liberation were now imaginablethe Communist direction showed something more than 'betrayal' had taken place. The Party's ethnic and
race following, which had in a certain sense compensated for its limited cadre outside the leadership of
industrial unions, drifted away. Whatever its future, American radicalism would be something very different from what it had been." Paul Buhle, "Marxism in the U.S.A.," op. cit., p. 32.
197. See Stanley Weir, "Revolutionary Artist," Urgent Tasks12 (Summer 1981):87; and Tony Martin, "C. L.
R. James and the Race/Class Question," op. cit., pp. 25-26.
198. See W. Jerome and A. Buick, "Soviet State Capitalism? The History of an Idea:' Survey 62 (January
1967); and Martin, ibid. Daniel Bell has contributed a comic version of American Trotskyism, cf. Marxian
Socialism in the United States, op. cit., pp. 153-57.
199. See Martin, ibid; and Georgakas, op. cit., passim.
zoo. James, Notes on Dialectics, op. cit., p. 7. Subsequent pagination will be indicated in the text.
201. "Lenin had a notion of socialism. It is noticeable that up to 1905 he thought of socialism always in
terms of the Commune. And after 1917 he changed-he changed not for Russia but for the world. We have
to do the same. We have not done it. For if we had we would recognize in Lenin's articles and methods in
Russia of 1917-23 the greatest possible source of theoretical understanding and insight into the world of
today." Ibid., p. 147.
202. On occasion, James came quite close to acknowledging this paradox: "The party is the knowing of
the proletariat as being. Without the party the proletariat knows nothing. We are here at the climax of a
development characteristic of class society. The proletariat is the only historical class to which the party, the
political party, is essential . . . the bourgeoisie has never found a political party necessary to its existence.
The characteristic form of bourgeois political power is the perfection of the state, and for long periods the
bourgeoisie has been content and flourished even without control of the state power. The bourgeoisie has
no need for a special organization of knowing. Bourgeois society is capitalist production, and by its
position as agent of capital, the bourgeoisie automatically is in possession of capitalist knowing, science,
art, religion, and the essence of bourgeois politics which is the maintenance of capitalist production."
"Apart from its existence as wage-slaves, the proletariat has no history except the history of its political, i.e.
revolutionary, organizations. No class in history except the proletariat (and this is by no means accidental)
has ever openly, boldly, and both theoretically and practically, aimed at the seizure of state power. The
history of the theory and practice of this unprecedented phenomenon in human history is the history of
the proletarian political party." Ibid., pp. 172-73. For Castoriadis, see his "On the History of the Workers'
Movement:' Telos30 (1976): 3-42; and Dick Howard, op. cit., chap. lo.
203. "[A] moment's (Marxist) reflection points to the inadequacy of Trotsky's notion of Russia as a
'degenerated workers' state . . . The 'degeneration' would concern only the form, not the essence, of the
Russian social formation. But this confuses the juridical forms of property with the actual relations of
production themselves. For Marx, it is precisely these relations of production which determine the forms
of distribution and their (deformed) superstructural reflection. The vacillations in Trotsky's own andyses-for example on the question of 'Thermidor,' or on the tactics to be followed by the Opposition-stem
from the identification of form and essence." Dick Howard, ibid., p. 265.
204. "It was the workers who did the theoretical work on the soviet. . . . They thought over the soviet.
They analysed it and remembered it, and within a few days of the February revolution they organized in
the great centres of Russia this unprecedented social formation. Lenin saw it this time." James, Notes on
Dialectics, op. cit., p. 138.
205. Vincent Harding recalled: "One of the things I remember with a combination of sadness and humor
NOTES TO PAGES 2 7 9 - 8 5

403

was a long conversation that C. L. R. and Harry Haywood had in our house in Atlanta. It was focused to a
large degree-and I just found it somewhat ironic and, as I said, somewhat sad, even though a lot of the
development of the conversation also had its humor to it-to see these two really experienced and gifted
Black men literally arguing about which expression of Marxist ideology and organization was really best. I
think with that experience it took both of them out of the mainstream of so much of Black life, and took
their strengths away from that mainstream. I just have the feeling it would have been so much healthier if
both of these men might have found some common ground and might have found ways of using their
energy beyond those kinds of arguments that grew out of the experiences of the late twenties and thirties,
that for them were very fresh wounds and very hard experiences . . . it was just very hard to feel the real
significance of some ofthose ideological arguments that they were carrying on at that time." Interview with
Harding by Ken Lawrence, published as "Conversation," Urgent Tasks 12 (Summer 1981):124.
206. See John Bracey's "Nello," Urgent Tasks 12 (Summer 1981): 125.
207. Paul BuhleINoah IgnatinIJames EarlyIEthelbert Miller interview with James, Urgent Tasks 12
(Summer 1981): 82.

Chapter Eleven
1. The social and literary critiques of H. L. Mencken and the radical novels of Sinclair Lewis and
Theodore Dreiser were Wright's formative introduction to American thought. See Michael Fabre, The
Unfinished Quest of Richard Wright, William Morrow, New York, 1973, pp. 67-69. He had, however, an
earlier instruction that Addison Gayle recapitulates: "He discovered that the actions of whites were often
precipitous; altercations with them might occur spontaneously, for seemingly illogical reasons or none at
all. Among his earliest jobs was one as a porter in a clothing store owned by two white men, father and son.
Both sported reputations for maltreatment of blacks. He witnessed several beatings and slappings of blacks
who fell behind in their payments. One of the most despicable concerned a black woman. Unable to pay
her bill, she was dragged into the store by the two men and herded toward the back room, where she was
pummeled and kicked. Afterward, in a state of semiconsciousness, she was shoved out into the street. A
white policeman appeared as if on call, stared contemptuously at the dazed woman, then arrested her for
drunkenness. The two men washed their hands, gazed benevolently at Wright." Gayle, Richard Wright:
Ordeal of a Native Son, Anchor Press, Garden City, 1980, p. 35. Among numerous instances like this, two
others are enlightening: "He did not take [white] threats about murder lightly. The example of Bob,
brother of one of his classmates, was too recent. Bob, who worked in a hotel frequented by white
prostitutes, was rumored to have been involved with one ofthem. Some white folks warned him to end the
relationship. For whatever reason, he did not do so and was lynched. When his classmate had rendered the
episode to him, Wright had been moved by his friend's grief; but he had felt, too, something of the anxiety
and fear that the act of murder produced in the entire black community. Such actions were designed to
control behavior and to stem the desire for rebellion among blacks." Ibid., p. 36. Earlier, white terror had
struck much closer. Wright's mother had taken her two sons to live with her sister Margaret and her
husband, Silas. One night Silas did not return: "The atmosphere in the house was one of silent, desperate
waiting. Food was kept hot on the stove. Each sound inside and outside the house rang with deafening
clarity. The two sisters took turns peering into the early mist. Sometime later, they were called to attention
by a knock on the door. It was not Silas' knock. It was the knock of the dreaded messenger, one of the
unsung blacks who historically, sometimes in the dark of the night or the early morning, surreptitiously
delivered messages of disaster. This one was short, precise: Hoskins had been killed by white men. His
family was to stay away from town. There were to be no final rites." Ibid., p. 17. Experiences such as these,
coupled with his father's abandonment of his family, his mother's breakdown and paralysis, his short but
nightmarish stay in an orphanage, had predictable results on Wright's personality. But most can be directly
and not too indirectly traced to their bases in American social history, particularly where Black labor had
been employed. It is hardly to the point, as in the instance of Martin Kilson's pseudo-psychological and
reductionist treatment of Wright, to frame them in terms of "marginality." Cf. Kilson, "Politics and
Identity Among Black Intellectuals," Dissent (Summer 1981):339-49.
2. See James Baldwin, "The Exile" and "Alas, Poor Richard:' in Nobody Knows My Name, Dial, New York,
1961; and also Ellen Wright's accounts of Baldwin and Wright in Faith Berry, "Portrait of a Man as
Outsider:' Negro Digest, December 1968, pp. 27-37,
3. See James Ford, "The Case of Richard Wright," Daily Worker, 5 September 1944.
4. See Ben Burns, "They're Not Uncle Tom's Children:' The Reporter 14, no. 8 (March 1956): 21-23; and
Gayle, op. cit., p. 272.
5. See "Amid the Alien Corn," unidentified author, Time, 17 November 1958, p. 28; see also Gayle's
speculations, op. cit., p. 287.
6. Gayle, who has had access to heavily censored documents from the American State Department, the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the Central Intelligence Agency, reports that the CIA was "monitoring" talks by Wright as early as April 1951 (op. cit., pp. 219-21); that Wright's "leadership of the Franco404

NOTES TO PAGES 2 8 5 - 8 9

American Fellowship angered agents of the military, the FBI, the CIA, and the State Department" (p. 221);
that within the Black expatriate group, made up of "writers, artists, students, ex-GI's, composers, musicians, and representatives of various governmental agencies such as UNESCO and the United States
Information Service . . . there were those, a growing number, who served as agents or informers for the
CIA, the FBI, and the American Embassy" (p. 207); and that the agencies' files indicated an increasing
traffic of correspondence, reports, and surveillance on Wright from 1956 until his death in 1960 (pp. 26263; 277-86). Wright, himself dealt with the CIA'S activities in the American Black movement and in the
expatriate community in France in two works; his unpublished manuscript, "Island of Hallucination"
(later published under the title American Hunger), and his speech to students and members of the
American Church in Paris (8 November 196o), entitled "The Situation of the Black Artist and Intellectual
in the United States." Wright's comments in the speech have been summarized by Fabre, op. cit., p. 518. For
more on Wright and the CIA, see Constance Webb, Richard Wright, Putnam, New York, 1968, pp. 375-77,
396; and Faith Berry, op. cit. Paul Robeson, among others, was undergoing similar treatment by American
agencies at this time. See Philip S. Foner (ed.), Paul Robeson Speaks, BrunnerIMazel, New York, 1978:
"[Bleyond revoking Robeson's passport and forbidding him to leave the continental United States from
1950 to 1957, officials of the United States government also sought to influence public opinion against
Robeson; to discourage another government 'from honoring Robeson as a great humanitarian and activist
for human rights'; to prevent Robeson's employment abroad in a non-political area; and to undermine his
political impact by issuing anti-Robeson news releases, and using or soliciting statements of other black
leaders to discredit him" (p. 4).
7. See Hoyt Fuller's interview with Chester Himes in Black World 21 (March 1972):93; Webb, op. cit., pp.
312,417; and Gayle, op. cit., pp. 235-36. Schine was an investigator on the staff of Senator Joseph McCarthy's
Senate Subcommittee on Investigations. Like Roy Cohn, Schine seems to have been one of several links
between McCarthy and the "elites" whose support gave McCarthy power. Cf. Michael P. Rogin, The
Intellectuals and McCarthy, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1967, p. 250.
8. Richard and Ellen Wright had few illusions concerning their enemies, but conclusive evidence was not
easily obtained. See Berry, op. cit., pp. 34ff. Some of Wright's acquaintances were skeptical about a
"campaign" against Wright but others found it quite reasonable to assume one was in place, see Ollie
Harrington, "The Mysterious Death of Richard Wright," Daily World, 17 December 1977. Gayle's review of
the "sanitized files of the American intelligence agencies brings the pattern much closer to the surface.
Still there are the worrying problems of missing documents and heavily censored ones: "In fact, the
number of censored documents during these last, most troublesome years of Wright's life make it difficult
to know just what areas of his life or activities were targeted." Gayle, op. cit., pp. 290-91.
9. Fabre published the following letter from Wright to Margit de Sabloniere on 30 March 1960: "You
must not worry about my being in danger.. . I am not exactly unknown here and I have personal friends in
the de Gaulle cabinet itself. Of course, I don't want anything to happen to me, but if it does, my friends will
know exactly where it comes from. If I tell you these things, it is to let you know what happens. So far as the
Americans are concerned, I'm worse than a Communist, for my work falls like a shadow across their policy
in Asia and Africa. That's the problem; they've asked me time and again to work for them: but I'd die
first. . . . But they try to divert me with all kinds of foolish tricks." Fabre, op. cit., p. 509. The files that Gayle
has seen confirm Wright's assertions, even beyond Fabre's expectations: "Although he exaggerated the
extent and intent of some attacks, I believe that many were expressly designed to make him lose his sense of
reality. Whether caused by personal jealousy, political intrigue or racial malevolence, the desire to harm
Wright was indisputable." Ibid., pp. 524-25. Seven years later, Gayle was more equivocal: "The temptation
to draw conclusions in line with those who believe that the FBI and the CIA were directly involved in
Wright's sudden death are great. To do so, however, based upon the facts of the documents, would be
wrong. I did not find, nor did I expect tofind, evidence to support this assertion, held by a great many of the
writer's friends. What I found was a pattern of harassment by agencies of the United States Government,
resembling at times a personal vendetta more so than an intelligence-gathering investigation" (my emphasis). Gayle, op. cit., p. xv. Gayle, however, believes that there is something amiss in the documents: "The
role of the State Department, however, is another matter, for it was here that the seeming vendetta
occurred. The only document that supposedly originated with the State Department casts Wright in an
unfavorable position. Documents filtered through the State Department to the FBI show an inordinate
amount of activity on the part of the Foreign Service during the last months of Wright's life. Most of the
documents are heavily deleted, so their content is difficult to comprehend clearly. Whether there is any
connection between this activity and Wright's death may be known only if the deleted sections of the
documents are released." Ibid. In addition, of course, as rohn Stockwell, a former CIA operative has shown,
the State Department by the early 1970s at least had developed communications procedures concerning
covert operations that denied access to even its own communicators. See Stockwell, In Search of Enemies,
Futura Publications, London, 1979, p. 93.
lo. American Hunger (Harper and Row, New York, 1977) is the title Wright originally suggested (among
others) for his unpublished manuscript, "Island of Hallucination." Fabre, op. cit., p. 616 n. 19. The mateNOTES T O PAGES 2 8 9 - 9 0

405

rial published under the former title is in large measure the parts of Black Boy (Harper, New York, 1945),
which Harper expunged from its 1945 edition. Darryl Pinckney would appear to be wrong when he
suggests in his review of American Hunger that Wright himself was responsible for the deletion (see
"Richard Wright: the Unnatural History of a Native Son,' Village Voice,4 July 1977. p. go), since Wright had
published much of the material in the Atlantic Monthly (August and September 1944) under the title "I
Tried to be a Communist."
11. Robert Bone, The Negro Novel in America, Yale University Press, New Haven, 1965, p. 158.
12. Ibid., p. 160.
13. See Bone, ibid., and Addison Gayle, The Way of the New World (Doubleday, Garden City, 1976), for
these characterizations of Wright's work. For good reasons Gayle does not cite his previous work in his
biography of Wright.
14. For the Gold Coast (now Ghana), see Wright's report, Black Power (Harper, New York, 1954); and
Cedric 1. Robinson, "A Case of Mistaken Identity:'. -paper
-presented to the African Studies Association
Conference, Los Angeles, 1November 1979.
15. Fabre, op. cit., p.xviii.
16. Harold Cruse, The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual, William Morrow, New York, 1971, p. 182.
17. Ibid., p. 188.
18. Richard Wright, "Blueprint for Negro Writing," New Challenge, Fall 1937, p. 61. This essay was
reprinted in Race and Class 21, no. 4 (1980).
19. Quite early on in his party experience, Wright while reflecting on his mother's reaction of horror to
Communist propaganda had come to the conclusion that: "They had a program, an ideal, but they had not
yet found a language." Richard Crossman (ed.), The God That Failed, Harper, New York, 1965, p. 107.
20. See Fabre, op. cit., pp. 89-200; and Webb, op. cit., pp. 114-16.
21. Daniel Aaron, "Richard Wright and the Communist Party," New Letters (Winter 1971):178.
22. Crossman, op. cit., pp. 107-8. For some other interesting attempts to deal with the development of
American working-class thought, see Stanley Feldstein and Lawrence Costello (eds.), The Ordeal ofAssitnilation, Doubleday, Garden City, 1974; and the special issue, "The Origins of Left Culture in the US: 18801940," Cultural Correspondence/Green Mountain Irregulars 6-7 (Spring 1978).
23. Wright, "Blueprint:' op. cit., p. 59.
24. See Alfred Meyer, Leninism, Praeger, New York, 1971, pp. 40-41; and Leonard Shapiro, "Two Years
That Shook the World:' New York Review of Books, 31 March 1977, pp. 3-4.
25. See Geiss, op. cit., pp. 163-75, 213.
26. Gayle, The Way of the New World, op. cit., chap. 8.
27. James Baldwin, "Everybody's Protest Novel," in Notes of a Native Son, Dial Press, New York, 1955, p.
22.
28. Sterling Brown's review in Opportunity, June 1940, p. 185.
29. Clifton Fadiman's review in the New Yorker, 2 March 1940, p. 6.
30. Crossman, op. cit., p. 106.
31. Ibid., p. 105
32. Ibid., p. 108.
33. See Benjamin Gitlow, I Confess, op. cit., chaps. 15 and 16; and 1oseph Starobin, American Communism
in Crisis, op. cit., p. 22.
34. See Wilson Record, The Negro and the Communist Party, op. cit.; and Roger Kanet, "The Comintern
and the 'Negro Question': Communist Policy in the United States and Africa, 1921-1941," Survey, Autumn
1973, pp. 86-122.
35. Fabre, op. cit., p. 137.
36. Crossman, op. cit., pp. 141-42.
37. Ibid., p. 146.
38. Ibid.
39. See Earl Browder, "Democracy and the Constitution:' in The People's Front, International Publishers,
New York, 1938, p p 23-48> and "Resolution on the Offensive of Fascism and the Tasks of the Communist
International in the Fight for the Unity of Working Class Against Fascism," Communist International, 20
September 1935, p. 951.
40. Earl Browder, "The 18th Anniversary of the Founding of the Communist Party," in The People's Front,
op. cit., p. 271.
41. Ibid., p. 275.
42. Browder, "Revolutionary Background of the United States Constitution," ibid., p. 266; and "Twenty
Years of Soviet Power," ibid., p. 346.
43. See Wilhelm Reich's "What Is Class Consciousness?" in Sex-Pol: Essays 1929-1934, Lee Baxandall
(ed.), Vintage Books, New York, 1972.
44. Wright to Michael Gold, reported in Fabre, op. cit., p. 185.
45. Wright, "How 'Bigger' Was Born," introduction to Native Son, Harper, New York, 1966, p. xix.
406

NOTES T O PAGES 2 9 0 - 9 7

46. Ibid., p. xx.
47. Ibid., p. xxiv.
48. In April 1940, Wright had written to Gold: "[Ilf I should follow Ben Davis's advice and write of
Negroes through the lens of how the Party views them in terms of political theory, I'd abandon the Bigger
Thomases. I'd be tacitly admitting that they are lost to us, that fascism will triumph because it alone can
enlist the allegiance of those millions whom capitalism has crushed and maimed:' Fabre, op. cit., pp. 18586.
49. Wright, "How 'Bigger' Was Born:' op. cit., p. xix.
50. Ibid., p. xviii.
51. Ibid., p. xvii.
52. Ibid., p. xxiv.
53. Wright, Native Son, op. cit., pp. 391-92.
54. See Fabre, op. cit., pp. 184-87, for a summary of the reactions of party leaders to Native Son.
55. Wright, "Blueprint," op. cit., p. 60.
56. Jean Baudrillard, The Mirror of Production, Telos Press, St. Louis, 1975.
57. See Cornelius Castoriadis, "On the History of the Workers' Movement:' Telos, Winter 1976177,pp. 342.
58. Wright, "Blueprint," op. cit., p. 54.
59. Ibid., p. 58.
60. Richard Wright, The Outsider, Harper, New York, 1953, pp. 118-19.
61. See W. E. B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction, op. cit. passim.
62. See Theodore Draper, American Communism and Soviet Russia, op. cit.; Dan Carter, Scottsboro, op.
cit.; and Wilson Record, The Negro and the Communist Party, op. cit.
63. Wright, "Blueprint," op. cit., pp. 62-63.
64. See Fabre, op. cit., pp. 365ff; and Webb, op. cit., p. 312.
65. See Cedric J. Robinson, "The Emergent Marxism of Richard Wright's Ideologs' Race and Class 19,
no. 3 (1978): 221-37.
66. Richard Wright, White Man Listen!, Doubleday, Garden City, 1957, pp. 34-35. For the function of
myth, see Cedric J. Robinson, The Terms of Order, State University of New York Press, Albany, 1980.
67. See Giovanni Piana, "History and Existence in Husserl's Manuscripts," Telos 13 (Fall 1972): 86-164;
Georg Lukacs, "On the Responsibility of Intellectuals," Telos 2, no. 1 (Spring 1969): 123-31, William Leiss's
review on Husserl and Paul Piccone's "Reading the Crisis," Telos 8 (Summer 1971): 110-21 and 121-29,
respectively.
68. Karl Marx, "Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right: Introduction," in Robert
Tucker (ed.), The Marx-Engels Reader, W. W. Norton, New York, 1972, p. 12.
69. Wright, The Outsider, op. cit., p. 129.
70. Daniel Aaron, op. cit., p. 180
71. Wright, The Outsider, op. cit., p. 227.
72. Ibid., p. 334.
73. Richard Wright, "The Voiceless Ones," Saturday Review, 16 April 1960, p. 22. Raman K. Singh's
analysis of Cross may be applied (as he suggested) to Wright: "In opposing Communism, Cross is not
giving up Marxism; he is merely seeking to abolish the tyranny of the Party. And in adopting Existentialism, he is not abandoning Marxism, but showing his awareness of both economic and cosmic consciousness.'' Singh, "Marxism in Richard Wright's fiction," Indian Journal of American Studies 4, nos. 1, 2
(runelDecember 1974): 33-34. This is decidedly not the position taken by other writers who came out from
the Communist movement as John Diggins sees them; Diggins, "Buckley's Comrades: The Ex-Communist
as Conservative:' Dissent, Fa11 1975, pp. 370-81.
74. Wright, White Man Listen!, op. cit., pp. 19-20.
75. Wright, The Outsider, op. cit., p. 334.
76. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto, in Tucker, op. cit., p. 343.
77. Wright, The Outsider, op. cit., p. 221.
78. Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto, op. cit., p. 345.
79. Wright, The Outsider, op. cit., pp. 176-77.
80. Wright, "Blueprint," op. cit., p. 57.

NOTES TO PAGES 2 9 7 - 3 0 5

407

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aaron, Daniel. 1971. "Richard Wright and the Communist Party." New Letters, Winter.
Abrahams, Peter. 1957. Jamaica. Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London.
"Abyssinian Debate, The." 1936. New Leader, 17 April.
Adas, Michael. 1979. Prophets of Rebellion: Millenarian Protest Movements against the European Colonial
Order. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.
Ajayi, J. F. A., and Michael Crowder (eds.). 1972. History of West Africa, vol. 1. Columbia University Press,
New York.
Alavi, Hamza. 1965. "Peasants and Revolution:' The Socialist Register.
Alho, Olli. 1976. The Religion of the Slaves. Finnish Academy of Science, Helsinki.
Alvares, Francisco. 1970. Narrative of the Portuguese Embassy to Abyssinia during the Years 1520-1.p7, ed.
Lord Stanley of Alderley. Burt Franklin Publisher, New York.
Almond, Gabriel. 1965. The Appeals of Communism. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
"Amid the Alien Corn." 1958. Time, 17 November.
Anderson, James D. 1976. "Aunt Jemima in Dialectics: Genovese and Slave Culture." Journal ofNegro History 61.
Anderson, Jervis. 1973. A. Philip Randolph. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York.
Anderson, Perry. 1974. Lineages of the Absolute State. NLB, London.
-. 1979. Considerations of Western Marxism. Verso, London.
-. 1980. Arguments within English Marxism. Verso, London.
Anstey, Roger. i975a. The Atlantic Slave Trade and British Abolition, 1760-1810. Humanities Press, Atlantic
Highlands, N.J.
-. 1975b. "The Volume and Profitability of the British Slave Trade, 1761-1807." Race and Slavery in
the Western Hemisphere, ed. Stanley Engerman and Eugene Genovese. Princeton University Press,
Princeton.
Aptheker, Herbert. 1945. Essays in the History of the American Negro. International Publishers, New York.
-. 1964. American Negro Slave Revolts. International Publishers, New York (orig. 1943).
-. 1971. "The Historian." W E. B. Du Bois: A Profile, ed. Rayford Logan. Hill and Wang, New York.
-. 1973. "Maroons within the Present Limits of the United States." Maroon Societies, ed. Richard Price.
Anchor, Garden City.
-(ed.). 1976. The Correspondenceof W E. B. Du Bois, vol. 11. University of Massachusetts Press,
Amherst.
Arendt, Hannah. 1958. The Origins of Totalitarianism. Meridian Books, Cleveland.
Aronowitz, Stanley. 1971. "Does the United States Have a New Working Class?" The Revival ofAmerican
Socialism, ed. George Fischer. Oxford University Press, New York.
Asad, Tala1 (ed.). 1973. Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter. Humanities Press, New York.
Asante, S. K. B. 1973. "The Afro-American and the Italo-Ethiopia Crisis, 1934-1936." Race 15, no. 2.
Atanda, J. A. 1974. "British Rule in Buganda." Tarikh 4, no. 4.
Austen, Ralph. 1979. "The Islamic Slave Trade Out of Africa (Red Sea and Indian Ocean)." The Uncommon Market: Quantitative Studies in the Atlantic Slave Trade, ed. Henry Gemery and Jan Hogendorn.
Academic Press, New York.
Avineri, Shlomo. 1968. The Social and Political Thought ofKarl Marx. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
-- (ed.). 1969. Karl Marx on Colonization and Modernization. Anchor, Garden City.
Ayalon, David. 1953. "Studies on the Structure of the Mamluk Army, Part 2." Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 15.
-. 1977. "Studies in Al-Jabarti." Studies on the Mamluks in Egypt. Variorum Press, London.

Azurara, G. E. de. 1896. The Chronicle of the Discovery and Conquest of Guinea, vol. 1, ed. C. R. Beazley
and E. Prestage. Burt Franklin Publisher, New York.
Balandier, Georges. 1969. Daily Lije in the Kingdom of the Kongo. Meridian Books, New York.
-. 1970. Political Anthropology. Pantheon, New York.
Baldwin, James. 1955. Notes of a Native Son. Dial Press, New York.
-. 1961. Nobody Knows My Name. Dial Press, New York.
Banton, Michael, and Jonathan Harwood. 1975. The Race Concept. Praeger, New York.
Baptiste, Fitz A. 1978. "The United States and West Indian Unrest 1918-iy3y." Working Paper No. 18, Institute of Social and Economic Research, University of the West Indies, Jamaica.
Bark, William C. 1958. Origins of the Medieval World. Stanford University Press, Stanford.
Barnett, Richard and Ronald Muller. 1974. Global Reach. Simon and Schuster, New York.
Barr, Stringfellow. 1959. Mazzini, Portrait of an Exile. Holt, New York.
Barraclough, Geoffrey. 1963. The Origins ofModern Germany. Capricorn Books, New York.
Barth, Heinrich. 1857. Travels and Discoveries in North and Central Africa. 5 vols. Longmans, Green and
Co., London.
Batie, Robert Carlyle. 1976. "Why Sugar? Economic Cycles and the Changing Staples on the English and
French Antilles, 1624-54." Journal of Caribbean History 8.
Baumer, Franklin L. 1944. "England, the Turk, and the Common Corps of Christendom:' American Historical Review 50, no. 1.
Barzun, Jacques. 1932. Race. Harcourt Brace, New York.
-. 1966. The French Race. Kennirat, New York.
Baudrillard, Jean. 1975. The Mirror of Production. Telos, St. Louis.
Beach, D. N. 1979. " 'Chimurenga': The Shona Rising of 1896-97." Journal ofAfrican History 20, no. 3.
Beard, Charles. 1948. "Neglected Aspects of Political Science." American Political Science Review 43.
Beazley, C. Raymond. 1923. "Prince Henry of Portugal and His Political, Commercial and Colonizing
Work." American Historical Review 17, no. 2.
Beckford, George. 1972. Persistent Poverty. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bell, Daniel. 1967. Marxian Socialism in the United States. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Bell, Wendell. 1977. "Inequality in Independent Jamaica: A Preliminary Appraisal of Elite Performance."
RevistdReview Interamericana, Summer.
Beltran, G. Aguirre. 1945. "Races in Seventeenth-Century Mexico." Phylon 6, no. 3.
Bender, Gerald. 1978. Angola Under the Portuguese. University of California Press, Berkeley.
ben-Jochannan, Yosef. 1971. Africa: Mother of Civilization. Alkebu-Lan, New York.
Bennett, Lerone. 1964. Before the Mayflower. Johnson Publications, Chicago.
Berlin, Ira. 1974. Slaves without Masters. Vintage, New York.
Berlin Isaiah. 1973. "Historical Materialism." Karl Marx, ed. Tom Bottomore. Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs.
Bermant, Chaim. 1975. London's East End. Macmillan, New York.
Berry, Faith. 1968. "Portrait of a Man as Outsider." Negro Digest, December.
Berry, Mary F. 1971. Black Resistance, White Law. Appleton-Century-Croft, New York.
Bethell, Leslie. 1969. "The Independence of Brazil and the Abolition of the Brazilian Slave Trade: AngloBrazilian Relations, 1822-1826." Latin American Studies 1, no. 2.
Bidney, David. 1954. "The Idea of the Savage in North American Ethnohistory." Journal of the History of
Ideas.
Bittle, William, and Gilbert Geis. 1964. The Longest Way Home. Wayne State University Press, Detroit.
Blackman, Peter. 1981. Interview with C. I. Robinson. London, 18 November.
Blackstock, Paul, and Bert Hoselitz (eds.). 1952. "Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels." The Russian Menace to
Europe. Free Press, Glencoe.
Blake, John William. 1967. Europeans in West Africa, 1450-1460, vol. 1. Kraus, Nendeln.
Blassingame, John. 1972. The Slave Community. Oxford University Press, New York.
Bleby, Henry. 1853. Death Struggles of Slavery. William Nichols, London.
Bloch, Marc. 1966. French Rural History. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Bloom, Solomon. 1941. The World ofNations. Columbia University Press, New York.
Bone, Robert. 1965. The Negro Novel in America. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Bontemps, Arna. 1961. loo Years ofNegro Freedom. Dodd, Mead and Co., New York.
Borkenau, Franz. 1971. World Communism. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Bottomore, Tom (ed.). 1973. Karl Marx. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Boxer, C. R. 1962. The Golden Age ofBrazil, 1695-1750. University of California Press, Berkeley.
-. 1965. Four Centuries of Portuguese Expansion, 1415-1825. Witwatersrand University Press, Johannesburg.
-. 1975. Women in Iberian Expansion, 1415-1815. Oxford University Press, New York.
Boyd-Bowman, Peter. 1969. "Negro Slaves in Early Colonial Mexico." The Americas 26, no. 2.
410

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bracey, John. 1981. "Nello." Urgent Tasks 12.
Brandes, George. 1968. Ferdinand Lassalle. Bergman, New York (orig. 1874 and 1875).
Brandt, Joseph (ed.). n.d. Black Americans in the Spanish People's War against Fascism 1936-1939. New
Outlook Publishers, New York.
Braudel, Fernand. 1973. Capitalism and Material Life, 1400-1800. Harper and Row, New York.
-. 1976. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II, vols. 1and 2. Harper
and Row, New York.
Breitman, George (ed.). 1972. Leon Trotsky on Black Nationalism and Self-Determination. Merit Publishers, New York.
Brereton, Bridget. 1974. "The Experience of Indentureship: 1845-1917." Calcutta to Caroni. The East Indians of Trinidad, ed. John La Guerre. Longman Caribbean, Trinidad.
--. 1979. Race Relations in Colonial Trinidad, 1811-1900. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Briggs, Asa. 1960. "The Language of 'Class' in Early Nineteenth-Century England." Essays in Labour History, ed. Asa Briggs and John Saville. Macmillan, London.
Brisbane, Robert. 1970. The Black Vanguard. Judson Press, Valley Forge.
Brockway, Fenner. 1935. "What Can We Do about Mussolini?" New Leader, 19 July.
Broderick, Francis. 1959. W E. B. Du Bois: Negro Leader in a Time of Crisis. Stanford University Press,
Stanford.
Broderick, Francis, and August Meier (eds.). 1965. Negro Protest Thought in the Twentieth Century. BobbsMerrill, Indianapolis.
Brody, David. 1960. Steelworkers in America. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Brook, G. L. 1958. A History of the English Language. W. W. Norton, New York.
Browder, Earl. 1935. "Resolution on the Offensive of Fascism and the Tasks of the Communist International in the Fight for the Unity of Working Class against Fascism." Communist International, 20
September.
-. 1938. The People's Front. International Publishers, New York.
Brown, Dee. 1971. Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Brown, Michael Barratt. 1974. The Economics oflmperialism. Penguin, Harmondsworth.
Brown, Sterling. 1940. Review of Richard Wright's Native Son. Opportunity, June.
Bucher, Carl. 1968. Industrial Evolution. August Kelley, New York, (orig. 1901).
Buckley, Roger Norman. 1979. Slaves in Red Coats. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Buhle, Paul. 1970. "American Marxist Historiography, 1900-1940." Radical America, November.
-(ed.). 1981. C. L. R. James: His Life and Work, special issue of Urgent Tasks 12.
-. 1981. "Marxism in the U.S.A." Urgent Tasks 12.
Buhle, Paul, Noah Ignatin, James Early, and Ethelbert Miller. 1981. Interview with C. L. R. James. Urgent
Tasks 12.
Buisseret, David, and S. A. G. Taylor. 1978. "Juan de Bolas and His Pelinco." Caribbean Quarterly 24, nos.
1, 2.
Burke, James. 1978. Connections. Little, Brown, Boston.
Burn, W. L. 1937. Emancipation and Apprenticeship in the British West Indies. Jonathan Cape, London.
Burns, Ben. 1956. "They're Not Uncle Tom's Children." The Reporter 14, no. 8.
Burridge, T. D. 1976. British Labour and Hitler's War. Andre Deutsch, London.
Butterfield, Herbert. 1957. The Origins of Modern Science. Free Press, New York.
Cabral, Amilcar. 1969. Revolution in Guinea. Monthly Review Press, New York.
-. 1973. Return to the Source. Africa Information Service.
Cairns, H. Alan. 1965. Prelude to Imperialism. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Callinicos, Alex. 1976. Althusser's Marxism. NLB, London.
Calogeras, Joao Pandia. 1959. A History of Brazil. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.
Campbell, Mavis. 1974. "Aristotle and Black Slavery: A Study in Race Prejudice." Race 15, no. 3.
-. 1976. The Dynamics of Change in a Slave Society. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, Rutherford.
Camporesi, Cristiano. 1972. "The Marxism of Sidney Hook." Telos, Summer.
Canetti, Elias. 1966. Crowds and Power. Viking Press, New York.
Canny, Nicholas. 1972. "The Ideology of English Colonization: From Ireland to America." William and
Mary Quarterly, 3d ser., vol. 30, no. 4.
Cantor, Milton. 1966. "The Image of the Negro in Colonial Literature." Images of the Negro in American
Literature, ed. Seymour Gross and John Edward Hardy. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
-. 1978. The Divided Left: American Radicalism, 1900-1975. Hill and Wang, New York.
Cantor, Norman (ed.). 1963. The Medieval World, 300-1300. Macmillan, New York.
Carr, Edward H. 1961. What Is History?Vintage, New York.
Carter, Dan T. 1968. Scottsboro: A Tragedy of the American South. Oxford University Press, London.
Carus-Wilson, E. M., and Olive Coleman. 1963. England's Export Trade, 1275-1547. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

41 1

Casal, Lourdes. 1979. "Race Relations in Contemporary Cuba." Minority Rights Group, no. 7, London.
Case, Lynn. 1970. Franco-Italian Relations, 1860-1865. AMS Press, New York (orig. 1932).
Castles, Stephen. 1972. "The Function of Labour Immigration in Western European Capitalism." New Left
Review, no. 73.
Castles, Stephen, and Godula Kosack. 1973. Immigrant Workers and Class Structure in Western Europe. Oxford University Press, London.
Castoriadis, Cornelius. 1976-77. "On the History of Workers' Movement." Telos, no. 30.
-. 1977. "The Relations of Production in Russia." The Marxian Legacy, ed. Dick Howard. Macmillan,
London.
Castro, Americo. 1954. The Structure of Spanish History. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Caute, David. 1964. Communism and the French Intellectuals, 1914-1960. Macmillan, New York.
Chace, William, and Peter Collier (eds.). 1970. Justice Denied. Harcourt, Brace and World, New York.
Chadwick, H. Munro. 1945. The Nationalities of Europe and the Growth of National Ideologies. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Chamberlin, E. R. 1967. Everyday Life in Renaissance Times. Capricorn Books, New York.
Charney, George. 1968. A Long Journey. Quadrangle, Chicago.
Chilcote, Ronald. 1969. Emerging Nationalism in Portuguese Africa. Hoover Institution, Stanford.
Clammer, David. 1973. TheZulu War. St. Martin's Press, New York.
Clarke, John Henrik, Esther Jackson, Ernest Kaiser, J. H. O'Dell (eds.). 1970. Black Titan: W E. B. Du Bois.
Beacon Press, Boston.
Claudin, Fernando. 1975. The Communist Movement: From Comintern to Corninform. Penguin, Harmondsworth.
Clegg, Ian. 1971. Workers' Self-Management in Algeria. Monthly Review Press, New York.
Clough, Owen (ed.). 1933. Report on African Affairs for the Year 1933. Empire Parliamentary Association,
Billings and Sons, Guildford.
Coffin, Joshua. 1970. "An Account of Some of the Principal Slave Insurrections." Slave Insurrections, Selected Documents. Negro University Press, Westport (orig. 1860).
Cohn, Norman. 1970. The Pursuit of the Millennium. Oxford University Press, New York.
Cole, G. D. H. 1953. A History of Socialist Thought, vol. 1, Socialist Thought, The Firerunners, 1789-1850 St.
Martin's Press, New York.
-. 1954. A History of Socialist Thought, vol. 2, Socialist Thought, Marxism and Anarchism, 1850-1890.
Macmillan, London.
Coleman, D. C. 1957. "Eli Heckscher and the Idea of Mercantilism." The Scandinavian Economic History
Review 5, no. 1.
Conrad, Robert. 1972. The Destruction of Brazilian Slavery, 1850-1888. University of California Press,
Berkeley.
Cook, M. A. (ed.). 1970. Studies in the Economic History of the Middle Eastfrom the Rise of Islam to the
Present Day. Oxford University Press, London.
Cook, Sherburne, and Woodrow Borah. 1963. The Aboriginal Population of Central Mexico on the Eve of
the Spanish Conquest. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Coolidge, Mary R. 1969. Chinese Immigration. Arno Press, New York (orig. 1909).
Cooper, Wayne, and Robert C. Reinders. 1968. "Claude McKay in England, 1920." New Beacon Reviews,
Collection One (reprinted from Race 9,1967).
Cornforth, Maurice (ed.). 1978. Rebels and Causes. Lawrence and Wishart, London.
Cox, Oliver. 1959. The Foundations of Capitalism. Philosophical Library, New York.
-. 1964. Capitalism as a System. Monthly Review Press, New York.
-. 1970. Caste, Class and Race. Modern Reader, New York (orig. 1948).
Craton, Michael. 1974. Sinews of Empire. Anchor, Garden City.
-. 1979. "Proto-Peasant Revolts: The Late Slave Rebellions in the British West Indies 1816-1832:' Past
and Present, no. 85.
-. 1980. "The Passion to Exist: Slave Rebellions in the British West Indies 1650-1832." Journal of Caribbean History 13.
Craven, Wesley Frank. 1956. The Legend of the Founding Fathers. New York University Press, New York.
-. 1971. White, Red and Black. University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville.
Crick, Bernard. 1959. The American Science of Politics. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Cronon, E. David. 1955. Black Moses: The Story ofMarcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement
Association. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
-(ed.). 1972.Marcus Garvey. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Crosby, Alfred W., Jr. 1977. The Columbian Exchange. Greenwood Press, Westport.
Crossman, Richard (ed.). 1965. The God That Failed. Harper, New York.
Crow, Jeffrey. 1980. "Slave Rebelliousness and Social Conflict in North Carolina, 1775-1802." Miilliarn and
Mary Quarterly 37.
412

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Cruise-O'Brien, Rita. 1980. "Factors of Dependence." Decolonization and Afrer, ed. W. H. Morris-Jones
and Georges Fischer. Frank Cass, London.
Cruse, Harold. 1967. The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual. William Morrow, New York.
Cuffe, Paul. 1969. "A Brief Account of the Settlement and Present Situation of the Colony of Sierra Leone
in Africa." Apropos ofAfrica, ed. Adelaide C. Hill and Martin Kilson. Frank Cass, London.
Cultural CorrespondenceIGreen Mountain Irregulars. 1978. "The Origins of Left Culture in the US, 18801940," nos. 6-7.
Cummings, Milton, and David Wise. 1977. Democracy under Pressure. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New
York.
Curtin, Philip. 1964. The Image ofAfrica. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
-. 1969. The Atlantic Slave Trade:A Census. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
-- (ed.). 1971. Imperialism. Walker, New York.
-. 1972. "The Atlantic Slave Trade, 1600-1800.'' History of West Africa, vol. 1, ed. J. F. A. Ajayi and Michael Crowder. Columbia University Press, New York.
-. 1977. "Slavery and Empire." Comparative Perspectives on Slavery in New World Plantation Societies,
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,vol. 292.
Curtis, L. P., Jr. 1968. Anglo-Saxons and Celts. New York University Press, New York.
Curwen, C. A. 1971. "China." The Making of the Modern World: Europe Discovers the World, vol. 1, ed.
Douglas Johnson. Barnes and Noble, New York.
Daget, Serge. 1975. "La repression Britannique sur les Negriers Fran~aisdu trafic illegal: Quelques conditions generales ou specifiques." Unpublished paper presented in Maine, 20-22 August.
Daniel, Norman. 1960. Islam and the West. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
-. 1979. The Arabs and Medieval Europe. Longman, London.
Dalfiume, Richard. 1971. "The 'Forgotten Years' of the Negro Revolution." Black Liberation Politics: A
Reader, ed. Edward Greer. Allyn and Bacon, Boston.
Daniels, Douglas. 1980. Pioneer Urbanites. Temple University Press, Philadelphia.
Darkwah, R. H. Kofi. 1975. Shewa, Menilek and the Ethiopian Empire, 1813-1889. Heinemann, London.
Davidson, Basil. 1964. The African Past. Little, Brown, Boston.
-. 1981. The People's Cause:A History of Guerrillas in Africa. Longmans, Harlow.
Davidson, David. 1966. "Negro Slave Control and Resistance in Colonial Mexico, 1519-1650. Hispanic
American Historical Review 46, no. 3.
Davies, Arthur. 1952. "Origins of Columbian Cosmography." Studi Colombiana, vol. 2, Stabilimento Arti
Grafiche ed Affini, Genova.
Davies, K. G. 1962. "The Mess of the Middle Class." Past and Present, no. 22.
-. 1970. The Royal African Company. Atheneum, New York.
Davies, K. G. B. 1952. "The Origin of the Commission System in the West India Trade." Transactions of the
Royal Historical Society, 5th ser., vol. 2.
Davis, David Brion. 1966. The Problems of Slavery in Western Culture. Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Davis, Horace. 1965. "Nations, Colonies and Social Classes: The Position of Marx and Engels." Science and
Society 29, no. 1.
-. 1967. Nationalism and Socialism. Monthly Review Press, New York.
Davis, Ralph. 1973. The Rise of the Atlantic Economies. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London.
Dawley, Alan. 1978-79. "E. P. Thompson and the Peculiarities of the Americas." Radical History Review,
no. 19.
Debbasch, Yvan. 1973. "Le Maniel: Further Notes." Maroon Societies, ed. Richard Price. Anchor, Garden
City.
Debien, Gabriel. 1973. "Marronage in the French Caribbean." Maroon Societies, ed. Richard Price, Anchor,
Garden City.
De Felice, Renzo. 1977. Interpretations ofFascism. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Deloria, Vine, Jr. 1969. Custer Died for Your Sins. Macmillan, New York.
Denham, Major, Capt. Clapperton, and the late Dr. Oudney. 1831. Travels and Discoveries in Northern and
Central Africa. 4 vols. John Murray, London.
DePauw, Linda Grant. 1973. "Land of the Unfree: Legal Limitations on Liberty in Pre-Revolutionary
America." Maryland Historical Magazine 68, no. 4.
Derry, T. K., and M. G. Blakeway. 1973. The Making ofPre-Industrial Britain. John Murray, London.
Deutscher, Isaac. 1979. The Prophet Armed: Trotsky 1879-1921. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Dewar, Hugo. 1976. Communist Politics in Britain: The CPCBfrom Its Origins to the Second World War.
Pluto Press, London.
Dickson, P. G. M. 1967. The Financial Revolution in England. Macmillan, London.
Diggins, John. 1975. "Buckiey's Comrades: The Ex-Communist as Conservative." Dissent, Fall.
Diggs, Irene. 1953. "Zumbi and the Republic of 0 s Palmares." Phylon 14, no. 1.
Diop, Cheikh Anta. 1974. The African Origin of Civilization. Lawrence Hill, New York.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

413

Dobbs, Maurice. 1946. Studies in the Development of Capitalism. Routledge, London.
Dookeran, Winston. 1974. "East Indians and the Economy of Trinidad and Tobago." Calcutta to Caroni:
The East Indians of Trinidad, ed. John La Guerre. Longman Caribbean, Trinidad.
Douglas, Mary. 1966. Purity and Danger. Frederick Praeger, New York.
Draper, Theodore. 1957. The Roots ofAmerican Communism. Viking, New York.
-. 1960. American Communism and Soviet Russia. Viking, New York.
-. 1971. The Rediscovery of Black Nationalism. Secker and Warburg, London.
Drowser, Margaret S. 1965. "Egypt: Archaeology and History." Encyclopedia Britannica, vol. 8. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Du Bois, W. E. B. 1915. "The African Roots of the War." Atlantic Monthlyii5.
-. 1920. Darkwater. Constable and Co., London.
-. 1921. "Marcus Garvey." The Crisis 21, January.
-. 1927. "Judging Russia." The Crisis 33, February.
-. 1928. "Marcus Garvey and the NAACP." The Crisis35, February.
-. 1933. Lecture at the Rosenwald Conference. Reproduced in the Baltimore Afro-American, 20 May.
-. 1968a. The Autobiography of W E. B. Du Bois. International Publishers, n.p.
-. 1968b. Dusk of Dawn. Schocken, New York (orig. 1940).
-. 1969a. Black Reconstruction in America, 1860-1880. World Publishing, Cleveland (orig. 1935).
-. 1969b. The Suppression of the African Slave-Trade to the United States of America, 16-38-1870.
Schocken, New York (orig. 1896)
-. i97oa. Black Titan: W E. B. Du Bois, ed. John Hendrick Clarke et al. Beacon Press, Boston.
-. 1970b. W E. B. Du Bois Speaks, ed. Philip Foner. Pathfinder Books, New York.
-. 1971. The Seventh Son: The Thought and Writings of W E. B. Du Bois, vol. 1, ed. Julius Lester. Vintage,
New York.
-. 1972a. W; E. B. Du Bois: The Crisis Writings, ed. Daniel Walden. Fawcett, Greenwich.
-. 1972b. The Emerging Thought of W: E. B. Du Bois, ed. Henri Lee Moon. Simon and Schuster, New
York.
-. 1976. The Correspondence of W E. B. Du Bois, vol. 2, ed. Herbert Aptheker. University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst.
Dubofsky, Melvyn. 1969. We Shall Be All: A History of the Industrial Workers of the World. Quadrangle1
New York Times, New York.
Duffield, Ian. 1981. "The Dilemma of Pan-Africanism for Blacks in Britain, 1760-1950." Paper presented to
the International Conference on the History of Blacks in Britain, University of London, September.
Dunn, Richard S. 1972. Sugar and Slaves: The Rise of the Planter Class in the English West Indies, 1624-1713.
University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.
Dupuy, Alex. 1976. "Spanish Colonialism and the Origin of Underdevelopment in Haiti." Latin American
Perspectives, iss. 9, vol. 3, no. 2.
-.
1982. "Class Formation and Underdevelopment in Nineteenth-Century Haiti." Race and Class 24,
no. 1.
Dzidzienyo, Anani. 1979. "The Position of Blacks in Brazilian Society." Minority Rights Group, no. 7,
London.
Edwards, R. D. 1965. "The Tudors" (part of the essay, "Ireland), Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. 7.
Elder, J. D. 1970. "The Yoruba Ancestor Cult in Gasparillo." Caribbean Quarterly 16, no. 3.
Ellis, P. Berresford. 1973. A History of the Irish Working Class. George Braziller, New York.
Elkins, W. F. 1970. "A Source of Black Nationalism in the Caribbean: The Revolt of the British West Indies
Regiment at Taranto, Italy." Science and Society, no. 34.
Eltis, D. 1975. "The Direction and Fluctuation of the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade, 1821-43: A Revision of
the 1845 Parliamentary Paper." Unpublished paper presented in Maine, 20-22 August.
Engels, Friedrich. 1950. The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844. George Allen and Unwin,
London (orig. 1845).
-. 1967a. "The Peasant War in Germany." The German Revolutions, ed. Leonard Kriegar. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
-. 1967b. "Germany: Revolution and Counter-Revolution." The German Revolutions, ed. Leonard
Kriegar. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
-. 1972a. The Role of Force in History. International Publishers, New York.
-. 1972b. "History of Ireland." Ireland and the Irish Question, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. International Publishers, New York.
-. 1972~.Introduction to Karl MarxS The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Selected Works, vol. 1. International Publishers, New York.
-. 1972d. "Socialism: Utopian and Scientific." The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. Robert Tucker. W. W. Norton. New York.
414

BIBLIOGRAPHY

-.

1973. "The Magyar Struggle." The Revolutions of 1848, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. International
Publishers, New York.
Engerman, Stanley L., and Eugene D. Genovese (eds.). 1975. Race and Slavery in the Western Hemisphere.
Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Ennes, Ernesto. 1948. "The Palmares 'Republic' of Pernambuco: Its Final Destruction, 1697." The Americas
5, no. 2.
Enzensberger, Hans Magnus. 1974. Introduction. The Devastation of the Indies: A BriefAccount, Bartolome de Las Casas. Seabury Press, New York.
Epstein, Melech. n.d. The Jew and Communism. Trade Union Sponsoring Committee, New York.
Escalante, Aquiles. 1973. "Palenques in Colombia." Maroon Societies, ed. Richard Price. Anchor, Garden
City.
Espinosa, Antonio Vazquez de. 1942. Compendium and Description of the West Indies. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C. (orig. 1629).
Essien-Udom, E. U. 1962. Black Nationalism. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Evans, William McKee. 1980. "From the Land of Canaan to the Land of Guinea: The Strange Odyssey of
the 'Sons of Ham.' " American Historical Review 85, no. 1.
Fabre, Michel. 1973. The Unfinished Quest ofRichard Wright. William Morrow, New York.
Fadiman, Clifton. 1940. Review of Richard Wright's Native Son. New Yorker, z March.
Fanon, Frantz. 1963. The Wretched of the Earth. Grove Press, New York.
Feldstein, Stanley, and Lawrence Costello (eds.). 1974. The Ordeal ofAssimilation. Doubleday, Garden
City.
Fernandes, Florestan. 1967. "The Weight of the Past." Daedalus, no. 96.
-. 1969. The Negro in Brazilian Society. Columbia University Press, New York.
File, Nigel, and Chris Power. 1981. Black Settlers in Britain, 1555-1958. Heinemann Educational Books,
London.
Finley, M. I. 1964. "Between Slavery and Freedom." Comparative Studies in Society and History 6, April.
Finn, R. Weldon. 1963. An Introduction to Domesday Book. Longmans, London.
Fisch, Max. 1970. The New Science of Giambattista Vico. Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Fischer, George (ed.). 1971. The Revival ofAmerican Socialism. Oxford University Press, New York.
Fishel, Leslie, Jr., and Benjamin Quarles (eds.). 1970. The Black American. Scott, Foreshaw, Morrow, Glenview.
Fitzgerald, Frances. 1980. America Revisited. Vintage, New York.
Fogel, Robert, and Stanley Engerman. 1974. Time on the Cross, vol. 2. Little, Brown, Boston.
Foner, Jack D. 1974. Blacks and the Military in American History. Praeger, New York.
Foner, Philip (ed.). 1970. W E. B. Du Bois Speaks. Pathfinder Press, New York.
-- (ed.). 1972. The Voice of Black America, vol. 1. Capricorn Books, New York.
-. 1976. Organized Labor and the Black Worker, 1619-1973. International Publishers, New York.
-(ed.). 1978. Paul Robeson Speaks. BrunnerIMazel, New York.
Forbath, Peter. 1979. The River Congo. D. P. Dutton, New York.
Ford, James. 1944. "The Case of Richard Wright." Daily Worker, 5 September.
Forster, Margaret. 1980. William Makepeace Thackeray: Memoirs of a Victorian Gentleman. Quartet,
London.
Foster, William 2.1932. Towards Soviet America. Hyperion Press, Westport.
-. 1970. The Negro People in American History. International Publishers, New York.
Franco, Jose L. 1973. "Maroons and Slave Rebellions in the Spanish Territories." Maroon Societies, ed.
Richard Price. Anchor, Garden City.
Frankfort, Henri. 1961. The Ancient Egyptian Religion. Harper, New York.
Franklin, Benjamin. 1961. "Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries,
etc." The Papers of Benjamin Franklin, ed. Leonard W. Labaree. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Franklin, John Hope. 1967. From Slavery to Freedom. Knopf, New York.
Fraser, W. H. 1970. "Trade Unionism." Popular Movements c. 1830-1850, ed. J. T. Ward. MacmiUan,
London.
Frazier, E. Franklin. 1947. "Human, All Too Human: The Negro's Vested Interest in Segregation." Survey
Graphic, January.
--. 1957. The Black Bourgeoisie. Free Press, Glencoe.
Frederickson, George. 1971. The Black Image in the White Mind. Harper and Row, New York.
Fried, Albert and Ronald Sanders (eds.). 1964. Socialist Thought. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
Froude, James A. 1874. The English in Ireland, vols. 1-3. Scribner, Armstrong, New York.
Fuller, Hoyt. 1972. Intenriew with Chester Himes. Black World, no. 21.
Garrison, William Lloyd. 1968. Thoughts on African Colonization. Arno, New York (orig. 1832).
Gatell, Frank Otto, and Allen Weinstein (eds.). 1968. American Themes: Essays in Historiography. Oxford
University Press, New York.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

415

Gayle, Addison. 1976. The Way of the New World. Doubleday, Garden City.
1980. Richard Wright: Ordeal of a Native Son. AnchorIDoubleday, New York.
Geggus, David. 1980. "Haitian Divorce." Times Literary Supplement, 5 December.
Geiss, Immanuel. 1974. The Pan-African Movement. Methuen, London.
Gemery, Henry, and Jan Hogendorn (eds.). 1979. The Uncommon Market: Quantitative Studies in the Atlantic Slave Trade. Academic Press, New York.
Genovese, Eugene. 1971. "The Legacy of Slavery and the Roots of Black Nationalism." Black Liberation Politics:A Reader, ed. Edward Greer. Allyn and Bacon, Boston.
-. 1975. Roll, Jordan, Roll. Deutsch, London.
-. 1979. From Rebellion to Revolution. Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge.
Genovese, Eugene, and Elizabeth Fox-Genovese. 1979. "The Slave Economies in Political Perspective."
Journal ofAmerican History 66, no. 1.
Georgakas, Dan. 1981. "Young Detroit Radicals, 1955-1965." Urgent Tasks 12.
Gerber, David. 1981. "Can You Keep 'Em Down on the Plantation after They've Read Rousseau?" Radical
America 15, no. 6.
Gerhard, Peter. 1978. "A Black Conquistador in Mexico." Hispanic American Historical Review 58, no. 3.
Giddings, Joshua. 1858. The Exiles of Florida. Follett, Foster and Co., Columbus.
Gilliam, Dorothy Butler. 1976. Paul Robeson: All-American. New Republic Books, Washington, D.C.
Gitlow, Benjamin. 1939.1 Confess. E. P. Dutton, New York.
Glazer, Nathan. 1961. The Social Basis ofAmerican Communism. Harcourt, Brace and World, New York.
Goddard, David (ed.). 1973. ldeology in Social Science. Vintage, New York.
Gomperz, Theodor. 1906. Greek Thinkers, vol. 1. John Murray, London.
Gossett, Thomas. 1963. Race: The History of an Idea in America. Southern Methodist University Press,
Dallas.
Gray, Daniel Savage. 1973. "Bibliographic Essay: Black Views on Reconstruction." Journal of Negro History
58, no. 1.
Greenfield, Sidney M. 1977. "Madeira and the Beginnings of New World Sugar Cane Cultivation and
Plantation Slavery: A Study in Institution Building." Comparative Perspectives on Slavery in New World
Plantation Societies, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 292, ed. Vera Rubin and Arthur
Tuden.
Greer, Edward (ed.). 1971. Black Liberation Politics: A Reader. Allyn and Bacon, Boston.
Grier, Sir Selsyn. 1938. "Unrest in the West Indies." Oxford University Summer School on Colonial Administration, Second Session, 27 June-8 July. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Griffith, G. 0.1932 Mazzini, Prophet ofModern Europe. Hodder and Stoughton, London.
Grimal Henri. 1978. Decolonization: The British, French, Dutch and Belgian Empires, 1919-1963. Routledge
and Kegan Paul, London.
Grab, Gerald N., and George A. Billias (eds.). 1967. Interpretations ofAmerican History, vol. I. Free Press,
New York.
de Groat, Sylvia W. 1973. "The Bush Negro Chiefs Visit Africa: Diary of an Historic Trip." Maroon Societies, ed. Richard Price. Anchor, Garden City.
Gross, Izhak. 1980. "The Abolition of Negro Slavery and British Parliamentary Politics, 1832-3." Historical
Journal 23, no. 1.
Gross, Seymour, and John Edward Hardy (eds.). 1966. Images of the Negro in American Literature. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Gruber, Helmut. 1974. Soviet Russia Masters the Comintern: International Communism in the Era of Stalini
Ascendancy. AnchorIDoubleday, Garden City.
Guiseppi, Montague. 1895. "Alien Merchants in England in the Fifteenth Century." Transactions of the
Royal Historical Society, new ser., vol. 9.
Gutkind, Peter. 1974. "The Emergent African Urban Proletariat." Occasional Paper Series, no. 8, Center
for Developing-Area Studies, McGill University, Montreal.
Gutman, Herbert. 1976. The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom, 1750-1925. Pantheon, New York.
Guzman, Jessie. 1961. "W. E. B. Du Bois-The Historian." Journal ofNegro Education, Fall.
Halecki, Oscar. 1963. The Millennium ofEurope. Notre Dame University Press, Notre Dame.
Halevy, Elie. 1961. Imperialism and the Rise of Labour: A History of the English People in the Nineteenth
Century, vol. 5. Ernest Benn, London (orig. 1926).
Hall, Marie Boas. 1964. "Scientific Thought." Shakespeare in His Own Age, Shakespeare Survey 17. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hall, Raymond. 1978. Black Separatism in the United States. University Press of New England, Hanover.
Hamdani, Abbas. 1979. "Columbus and the Recovery of Jerusalem." Journal of the American Oriental Society 99, no. l.
Hammond, J. L. 1930. "The Industrial Revolution and Discontent." Economic History Review 2, no. 2.
Haring, C. H. 1963. The Spanish Empire in America. Harcourt, Brace and World, New York.

-.

416

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Harlan, Louis R. 1972. Booker 7: Washington: The Makmg of a Black Leader. Oxford University Press, New
York.
Harrington, Ollie. 1977. "The Mysterious Death of Richard Wright." Daily Worker, 17 December.
Harris, Abram L. 1975. "Reconstruction and the Negro." New Republic, 7 August.
Harris, P. B. 1969. The Withdrawal of the Major European Powers from Africa. Monographs on Political
Science, no. 2. University College of Rhodesia, Salisbury.
Harris, William C. 1970. Introduction. The Facts of Reconstruction, John R. Lynch. Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis (orig. 1913).
Harrison, Royden. 1964. "The British Labour Movement and the International in 1864." The Socialist Register, 1964, eds. Ralph Miliband and John Saville. Merlin Press, London.
Hart, Richard. 1980. Slaves Who Abolished Slavery, vol. 1, Blacks in Bondage. Institute of Social and Economic Research, University of the West Indies, Jamaica.
Haupt, George. 1967. Introduction to the French Edition. A History of Bolshevism, Arthur Rosenberg.
Grasset, Paris.
-. 1972. Socialism and the Great War. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Haupt, George, Michael Lowy, and Claudia Weill. 1974. Les Marxistes et la question nationale. Francois
Maspero, Paris.
Havighurst, Alfred. 1958. The Pirenne Thesis. D. C. Heath, Boston.
Haward, W. I. 1951. "The Financial Transaction between the Lancastrian Government and the Merchants
of the Staple from 1449 to 1461: Studies in English Trade in the Fifteenth Century, ed. Eileen Power and
M. M. Postan. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Hays, Denys. 1966. Europe in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries. Longman, London.
1968. Europe: The Emergence of an Idea. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
Haywood, Harry. 1975. For a Revolutionary Position on the Negro Question. Liberator Press, Chicago.
-. 1978. Black Bolshevik. Liberator Press, Chicago.
Hechter, Michael. 1975. Internal Colonialism. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Heckscher, Eli. 1955. Mercantilism, vol. 1. George Allen and Unwin, London.
Hegel, G. W. F. 1956. The Philosophy of History, ed. C. J. Friedrich. Dover, New York.
Henderson, W. 0.1961. The Industrial Revolution in Europe. Quadrangle, Chicago.
-. 1976. The Life of Friedrich Engels, vol. 1. Frank Cass, London.
Henri, Florette. 1976. Black Migration. Anchor, Garden City.
Herder, Johann Gottfried Von. 1968. Reflections on the Philosophy of the History ofMankind. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago (orig. 1784-91).
Hertz, Friedrich. 1970. Race and Civilization. KTAV, n.p.
Hetherington, Penelope. 1978. British Paternalism and Africa, 1920-40. Frank Cass, London.
Heyck, Thomas W. 1974. The Dimensions of British Radicalism: The Case of Ireland. University of Illinois
Press, Urbana.
Hibbert, Christopher. 1978. Tne Great Mutiny. Viking Press, New York.
Higman, B. W. 1979. "Slavery Remembered: The Celebration of Emancipation in Jamaica." Journal of Caribbean History 12.
Hill, Adelaide C., and Martin Kilson. 1969. Apropos ofAfrica. Frank Cass, London.
Hill, Douglas (ed.). 1977. Tribune 40. Quartet Books, London.
Hill, Lawrence F. 1931. "The Abolition of the African Slave Trade to Brazil." Hispanic American Historical
Review 11, no. 2.
Hill, Robert A. 1981a. "Zion on the Zambezi: Dr. J. Albert Thorne, 'A Descendant of Africa, of Barbados,'
and the African Colonial Enterprise: The 'Preliminary Stage,' 1894-97." Paper presented at the International Conference on the History of Blacks in Britain, university of London, 28-30 September.
-. 1981b. "In England, 1932-1938." Urgent Tasks 12.
Hindus, Michael. 1976. "Black Justice under White Law: Criminal Prosecutions of Blacks in Antebellum
South Carolina." Journal ofAmerican History 63, no. 3.
Hines, Linda 0.1977. "White Mythology and Black Duality: George W. Carver's Response to Racism and
the Radical Left." Journal ofNegro History 62, no. 2.
Hirschfield, Magnus. 1938. Racism. Victor Gollancz, London.
Hobsbawm, Eric. 1952. "Economic Fluctuations and Some Social Movements since 1800.'' Economic History Review, 2d ser., vol. 5, no. 1.
-. 1962. The Age of Revolution: 1789-1848. Mentor, New York.
-. 1964. Labouring Men. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London.
-. 1968. Industry and Empire. Penguin, Harmondsworth.
-. 1972. "Some Reflections on Nationalism." Imagination and Precision in the Social Sciences, ed. T. J.
Nossiter, A. H. Hanson, and Stein Rokkan. Faber and Faber, London.
-. 1976. "The Crisis of Capitalism in Historical Perspective." Socialist Revolution, no. 30.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

417

-.

1978. "The Historians' Group of the Communist Party." Rebels and Causes, ed. Maurice Cornforth.
Lawrence and Wishart, London.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1971. America at 1750. Knopf, New York.
Holmes, Jack D. L. 1970. "The Abortive Slave Revolt at Pointe Coupee, Louisiana 1795." Louisiana History
11, no. 4.
Holmes, Martin. 1965. "Evil May-Day 1517." History Today 15, no. 9.
Homze, Edward. 1967. Foreign Labor in Nazi Germany. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Hook, Sidney. 1933. "Materialism." Encyclopedia of Social Sciences, vol. lo. New York.
-. 1962. From Hegel to Marx. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Hooker, James R. 1970. Black Revolutionary: George Padmore's Path from Communism to Pan-Africanism.
Praeger, New York.
Hopkins, Elizabeth. 1971. "The Nyabingi Cult of Southwestern Uganda." Rebellion in Black Africa, ed. R.
Rotberg. Oxford University Press, London.
Horsman, Reginald. 1981. Race and Manifest Destiny. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Howard, Dick. 1977. The Marxian Legacy. Macmillan, London.
Howard, Michael. 1981. "Empire, Race and War." History Today, no. 31.
Hunter, G. K. 1964. "Elizabethans and Foreigners." Shakespeare in His Own Age, Shakespeare Survey 17, ed.
Allardyce Nicoll. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hunwick, J. 0.1978. "Black Africans in the Islamic World: An Understudied Dimension of the Black
Diaspora." Tarikh 5, no. 4.
Huttenback, R. A. 1976. Racism and Empire. Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Ikime, Obaro. 1973. "Colonial Conquest and African Resistance in the Niger Delta States." Tarikh 4, no. 3.
Inalcik, Halil. 1966. The Ottoman Empire. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London.
Inglis, Brian. 1971. Poverty and the Industrial Revolution. Hodder and Stoughton, London.
Inikori, J. E. 1976a. "Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: An Assessment of Curtin and Anstey." Journal of
African History 17, no. 2.
-. 1976b. "Measuring the Atlantic Slave Trade: A Rejoinder by J. E. Inikori." Journal ofAfrican History
17, no. 4.
Irvine, Keith. 1970. The Rise of the Colored Races. W. W. Norton, New York.
Jackson, James. 1925. "The Negro in America." Communist International, February.
Jacobsen, Julius (ed.). 1968. The Negro and the American Labor Movement. Anchor, Garden City.
Jaffe, Philip. 1975. The Rise and Fall ofAmerican Communism. Horizon Press, New York.
James C. L. R. 1933. The Case for West-Indian SelfGovernment. Hogarth, London.
-. 1935. "Is This War Necessary?" New Leader, 4 October.
-. 1936a. " 'Civilising' the 'Blacks.' " New Leader, 29 May.
-. 1936b. "Fighting for the Abyssinian Empire." New Leader, 5 June.
-. 1937. World Revolution, 1917-1936: The Rise and Fall of the Communist International. Martin Secker
and Warburg, London.
-. 1963a. The Black Jacobins.Vintage, New York (orig. 1938).
-. 1963b. Beyond a Boundary. Hutchinson, London.
-. 1969. A History of Pan-African Revolt. Drum and Spear, Washington, D.C. (orig. 1938).
-. 1973. Modern Politics. bewickled, Detroit.
-. 1974. Interview with C. J. Robinson. Binghamton, New York, Spring.
-. i977a. Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution. Lawrence Hill, Westport.
-.
1977b. The Future in the Present. Lawrence Hill, Westport.
-. 1980a. Spheres of Existence. Allison and Busby, London.
-. i98ob. Notes on Dialectics. Allison and Busby, London.
-. 1980~."Radical Pan-Africanism in the 1930s: Interview with Alan J. MacKenzie." Radical History Review, no. 24.
James, C. L. R., and George Padmore. 1977. "Revolts in Africa." The Future in the Present, C. L. R. James.
Lawrence Hill, Westport (orig. 1938).
James, George. 1954. Stolen Legacy. Philosophical Library, New York (repr. 1976).
Jellema, Dirk. 1955. "Frisian Trade in the Dark Ages." Speculum 30, no. 1.
Jerome W., and A. Buick. 1967. "Soviet State Capitalism?: The History of an Idea." Survey, no. 62.
Jha, J. A. 1973. "Indian Heritage in Trinidad, West Indies." Caribbean Quarterlyig, no. 2.
Johnson, Douglas (ed.). 1971. The Making of the Modern World: Europe Discovers the World, vol. 1. Barnes
and Noble, New York.
Joll, James. 1965. "The German Confederation, 1815-1866." Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. lo.
Jones, Allen W. 1979. "The Black Press in the 'New South': Jesse C. Duke's Struggle for Justice and Equality.'' Journal ofNegro History 64, no. 3.
Jordan, Winthrop. 1968. White Over Black. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

418

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Kanet, Roger. 1973. "The Comintern and the 'Negro Question': Communist Policy in the United States
and Africa, 1921-1941." Survey, Autumn.
Karasch, Mary. 1974. "Black Worlds in the Tropics: Gilberto Freyre and the Woman of Color in Brazil."
Proceedings of the Pacific Coast Council on Latin American Studies, no. 3.
Katz, William L. 1968. "Earliest Responses of American Negroes and Whites to African Colonization." Introduction to Thoughts on African Colonization, William Lloyd Garrison. Arno, New York.
Katznelson, Ira. 1973. Black Men, White Cities. Oxford University Press, London.
Kees, Hermann. 1961. Ancient Egypt. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Keita, Lanciany (Edward Philips). 1977-78. "African Philosophical Systems: A Rational Reconstruction."
Philosophical Forum 9, nos. 2-3.
-. 1979. "The African Philosophical Tradition." African Philosophy: An Introduction, ed. Richard
Wright. University Press of America, Washington, D.C.
Keller, Bonnie. 1978. "Millenarianism and Resistance: The Xhosa Cattle Killing." journal ofAsian and African Studies 13, nos. 1-2.
Kent, R. K. 1965. "Palmares: An African State in Brazil:' journal ofAfrican History 6, no. 2.
-. 1970. "African Revolt in Bahia: 24-25 January 1835." journal of Social History3, no. 4.
Kiernan, V. G. 1957. "Foreign Mercenaries and Absolute Monarchy." Past and Present, no. 11.
-. 1965. "State and Nation in Western Europe." Past and Present, no. 31.
-. 1969. The Lords of Humankind. Weidenfeld and Nicholson, London.
-. 1982. European Empires from Conquest to Collapse. Leicester University Press, Leicester.
Kilson, Martin. 1981. "Politics and Identity among Black Intellectuals." Dissent, Summer.
Kimble, David. 1963. A Political History of Ghana: m e Rise of Gold Coast Nationalism, 1850-1928. Oxford
University Press, London.
King, Johannes. 1973. "Guerrilla Warfare: A Bush Negro View." Maroon Societies, ed. Richard Price. Anchor, Garden city.
Kiple, Kenneth. 1976. Blacks in Colonial Cuba, 1774-1899. University of Florida Press, Gainesville.
Knecht, Robert. 1971. "The Discoveries." The Making of the Modern World: Europe Discovers the World,
vol. 1. Barnes and Noble, New York.
Koning, Hans. 1976. Columbus: His Enterprise. Monthly Review Press, New York.
Kopytoff, Barbara Klamon. 1978. "The Early Development of Jamaican Maroon Societies." William and
Mary Quarterly35, no. 2.
Kranzberg, Melvin. 1965. "Industrial Revolution." Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. 12.
Krieger, Leonard (ed.). 1967. The German Revolutions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Krislov, Samuel. 1967. The Negro in Federal Employment. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Kropotkin, Petr. n.d. Mutual Aid. Extending Horizon Books, Boston.
Knhkoff, Allan. 1978. "The Origins of Afro-American Society in Tidewater Maryland and Virginia, 17001790." William and Mary Quarterly35, no. 2.
Labaree, Leonard W. (ed.). 1961. The Papers of Benjamin Franklin. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Lacerte, Robert. 1975. "The First Land Reform in Latin America: The Reforms of Alexander Potion, 18091814." Inter-American Economic Affairs 28, no. 4.
-. 1981. "Xenophobia and Economic Decline: The Haitian Case, 1820-1843." The Americas 37, no. 4.
La Guerre, John (ed.). 1974. Calcutta to Caroni: The East Indians of Trinidad. Longman Caribbean,
Trinidad.
Lantenari, Vittorio. 1963. Religions of the Oppressed. Knopf, New York.
Las Casas, Bartolome de. 1974. The Devastation of the Indies: A BriefAccount. Seahury Press, New York
(orig. 1542).
Latouche, Robert. 1961. The Birth of Western Economy. Barnes and Noble, New York.
Laurence, Dr. Stephen Moister. 1969. "The Trinidad Water Riot of 1903: Reflections of an Eyewitness," ed.
L. 0 . Laurence. Caribbean Quarterly15, no. 4.
Lawrence, Ken. 1981. "Conversation: Interview with Vincent Harding." Urgent Tasks 12.
Lazersfeld, Paul, and Anthony Oberschall. 1965. "Max Weber and Empirical Research." American Sociological Review 30, no. 2.
Lazonick, William. 1978. "The Subjection of Labour to Capital: The Rise of the Capitalist System." Review
of Radical Political Economics lo, no. 1.
Leiss, William. 1971. "Review on Husserl." Telos, no. 8.
LeMay, G. H. L. 1971. Black and White in South Africa. American Heritage Press.
Lenin, V. I. 1967a. Selected Works, vol. 1. International Publishers, New York.
-. 1967b. What Is to Be Done? Selected Works, vol. 1. International Publishers, New York.
-. 1967~."Left-Wing" Communism-An Infantile Disorder. Selected Works, vol. 3. Progress Publishers,
Moscow.
-. 1969. The State and Revolution. Selected Works, vol. 3. Lawrence and Wishart, London.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

419

-.

1970. "The Tasks of the Proletariat in the Present Revolution." Selected Works. Progress Publishers,
Moscow.
Leaner, Ralph, and Muhsin Mahdi (eds.). 1963. Medieval Political Philosophy. Free Press of Glencoe, New
York.
Levine, Lawrence. 1977. Black Culture and Black Consciousness.Oxford University Press, New York.
Lewis, Bernard. 1970. Race and Color in Islam. Harper and Row, New York.
Lichtheim, George. 1969. The Origins of Socialism. Praeger, New York.
-. 1973. Marxism: An Historical and Critical Survey. Praeger, New York.
Lichtman, Richard. 1970. "The Facade of Equality in Liberal Democratic Theory." Socialist Revolution,
January.
Liebman, Arthur. 1979. Jews and the Left. John Wiley, New York.
Livermore, Harold V. (ed.). 1963. Portugal and Brazil. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
-. 1965. "Portugal." Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. 18.
Logan, Rayford (ed.). 1971. W E, B. Du Bois: A Profile. Hill and Wang, New York.
London Times. 1816. Private letters published under "Negro Insurrection," 5 June.
Longmate, Norman. 1974. The Workhouse. St. Martin's Press, New York.
Lopez, R. S., H. A. Miskimin, and Abraham Udovitch. 1970. "England to Egypt, 1350-1500: Long-Term
Trends and Long-Distance Trade." Studies in the Economic History of the Middle East from the Rise of lslam to the Present Day. Oxford University Press, London.
Lopez, Robert S. 1966. The Birth of Europe. Phoenix House, London.
Lopez, Robert S., and Irving Raymond (eds.). 1955. Medieval Trade in the Mediterranean World. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Love, Edgar. 1967. "Negro Resistance to Spanish Rule in Colonial Mexico." Journal ofNegro History 52,
no. 2.
Low, W. Augustus. 1981. "Historians." Encyclopedia ofBlack America, ed. W. Augustus Low and Virgil
Cloft. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Lowy, Michael. 1976. "Marxists and the National Question." New Left Review, no. 96.
Lukacs, Georg. 1968. History and Class Consciousness.MIT Press, Cambridge.
-. 1969. "On the Responsibility of Intellectuals." Telos 2, no. 1.
Lundberg, Ferdinand. 1980. Cracks in the Constitution. Lyle Stuart, New York.
Luxemburg, Rosa. 1969. "The National Question." Rosa Luxemburg, ed. Peter Nettl. Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Lynch, Hollis. 1970. Edward Wilmot Blyden: Pan-Negro Patriot, 1832-1912. Oxford University Press,
London.
Lynch, John R. 1970. The Facts of Reconstruction. Robbs-Merrill, Indianapolis (orig. 1913).
McBride, David. 1977. "Africa's Elevation and Changing Racial Thought at Lincoln University, 1854-1886."
Journal ofNegro History 62, no. 4.
McDonald, Roderick. 1979. "The Williams Thesis: A Comment on the State of Scholarship." Caribbean
Quarterly 25, no. 3.
-.
1980. "Measuring the British Slave Trade to Jamaica, 1789-1808: A Comment." Economic History Review 33, no. 2.
MacFarlane, L. J. 1966. The British Communist Party. MacGibbon and Kee, Worcester and London.
MacIntyre, Stuart. 1980. A Proletarian Science: Marxism in Britain, 1917-1933. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Mclntyre, W. David. 1974. Colonies into Commonwealth. Blandford Press, London.
McKay, Claude. 1968. Harlem: Negro Metropolis. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York (orig. 1940).
-. 1970. A Long Wayfrom Home. Harcourt, Brace and World, New York (orig. 1937).
MacKenzie, Norman. 1969. Socialism:A Short History. Harper Colophon, New York.
McKinnon, Alan. 1980. "Communist Party Election Tactics: A Historical Review." Marxism Today 24,
no. 8.
McLellan, David. 1970. Marx before Marxism. Macmillan, London.
-. 1973. Karl Marx: His Life and Thought. Harper Colophon, New York.
McMillan, Duncan. 1965. "Charlemagne Legends." Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. 5. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
McNeill, William. 1977. Plagues and People. Anchor, Garden City.
Magubane, Bernard. 1971. "A Critical Look at Indices Used in the Study of Social Change in Colonial Africa." Current Anthropology 12, nos. 4-5.
Mair, Lucy. 1936. Native Policies in Africa. George Routledge, London.
-. 1975. "Anthropology and Colonial Policy." African Affairs, April.
Makonnen, Ras. 1973. Pan-Africanism from Within, ed. Kenneth King. Oxford University Press, London.
Makovic, Mihailo. 1977. "Stalinism and Marxism." Stalinism, ed. Robert Tucker. W. W. Norton, New York.
Malheiro, Agostinho Marques Perdigao. 1944. A escravidao no Brasil.
420

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Maolwist, Marian. 1959. "The Economic and Social Development of the Baltic Countries from the Fifteenth to the Seventeenth Centuries." Economic History Review, 2d ser., vol. 12, no. z.
Manchester, Alan. 1964. British Preeminence in Brazil: Its Rise and Decline. Octagon Books, New York.
Mangan, J. A. 1981. Athleticism in the Victorian and Edwardian Public School. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Mannheim, Karl. 1936. Ideology and Utopia. Harcourt, Brace and World, New York.
Mansergh, Nicholas. 1965. The Irish Question, 1840-1921. University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
Manuel, Frank. 1956. Introduction. The Philosophy of History, G. W. F. Hegel, ed. C. J. Friedrich. Dover,
New York.
Marable, Manning. 1981. Blackwater. Black Praxis Press, Dayton.
Marcus, Harold. 1975. The Life and Times ofMenelik II. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Marcuse, Herbert. 1968. Reason and Revolution. Beacon Press, Boston.
Marks, Shula. 1971. "The Zulu Disturbances in Natal." Rebellion in Black Africa, ed. Robert Rotberg. Oxford University Press, London.
Martin, Tony. 1972. "C. L. R. James and the RaceIClass Question." Race 2.
-. 1976. Race First. Greenwood Press, Westport.
Marx, Karl. 1965. Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations. International Publishers, New York.
-. 1968a. "The Future Results of British Rule in India." Karl Marx on Colonialism and Modernization,
ed. Shlomo Avineri. Doubleday, Garden City.
-. 1968b. The Holy Family, as quoted by Georg Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness.MIT Press,
Cambridge.
-. 1969. "Parliamentary Debate on India." New York Daily Tribune, 25 June 1853. Reprinted in Karl
Marx on Colonialism and Modernization, ed. Shlomo Avineri. Anchor, Garden City.
-. 1970. A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. International Publishers, New York.
-. i97ia. The Poverty ofPhilosophy. International Publishers, New York.
-. 1971b. The Class Struggles in France, 1848-50. Karl Marx: On Revolution, ed. Saul Padover. McGrawHill, New York.
-. i9p-a. The German Ideology. The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. Robert Tucker. W. W. Norton, New York.
-. 1977.b. "Critique of the Gotha Program." The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. Robert Tucker. W. W. Norton,
New York.
-. 1972C. "Theses on Feuerbach." The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. Robert Tucker. W. W. Norton, New
York.
-. 1972d. "Confidential Communication, 28 March 1870." Ireland and the Irish Question, Karl Marx
and Friedrich Engels. International Publishers, New York.
-. i972e. "On the Jewish Question." The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. Robert Tucker. W. W. Norton, New
York.
-. 1972f. "Outline of a Report on the Irish Question to the Communist Educational Association of
German Workers in London." Ireland and the Irish Question, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. International Publishers, New York.
-. 1977. Capital, vol. 1. International Publishers, New York.
Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. 1952. The Russian Menace to Europe, ed. Paul Blackstock and Bert
Hoselitz. Free Press, Glencoe.
-. i972a. The Communist Manifesto. The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. Robert Tucker. W. W. Norton, New
York.
-. 19p.b. Ireland and the Irish Question. International Publishers, New York.
-. 1972~.The German Ideology. The Marx-Engels Reader, ed. Robert Tucker. W. W. Norton, New York.
-. i972d. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Selected Works, vol. 1. International Publishers, New York.
-. 1973. The Revolutions of 1848. International Publishers, New York.
Mason, Daniel, and Jessica Smith (eds.). 1979. Foreword. Lenini Impact on the United States. Reprinted in
Highlights of a Fighting History: 60 Years of the Communist Party, USA, ed. Philip Bart et al. International Publishers, New York.
Mathieson, William Law. 1926. British Slavery and Its Abolition. Longmans, Green and Co., London.
Maxton, James, and Fenner Brockway. 1936. "The War Threat." New Leader, 17 April.
Mayhew, Arthur. 1938. "Education in the Colonies." Oxford University Summer School on Colonial Administration, Second Session, 27 June-8 July 1938. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Mehlinger, Louis. 1916. "The Attitudes of the Free Negro toward African Colonization." Journal ofNegro
History 1, no. 3.
Mehring, Franz. 1969. Karl Marx, The Story of His Life. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Meier, August. 197ia. "The Paradox of W. E. B. Du Bois." W E. B. Du Bois: A Profile, ed. Rayford Logan.
Hill and Wang, New York.
-. 1971b. " 'Radicals and Conservatives'-a Modern View." W E. B. Du Bois: A Profile, ed. Rayford
Logan. Hill and Wang, New York.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

411

Melendy, Howard Brett. 1972. The Oriental Americans. Twayne Publishers, New York.
Mellon, Matthew. 1969. Early American Views on Negro Slavery. Bergman, New York.
Merivale, Herman. 1967. Lectures on Colonization and Colonies. Augustus Kelly, New York (orig. 1861).
Merriam, Charles. 1927. "William Archibald Dunning." American Masters of Social Science, ed. Howard
W. Odum. Holt, New York.
Meyer, Alfred. 1962. Leninism. Praeger, New York.
Mez, Adam. 1937. The Renaissance ofIslam. Luzac and Co., London.
Miege, 1.-L. 1968. L'lmperialisme colonial italien de 1870 nosjours. SEDES, Paris.
-. 1980. "The Colonial Past in the Present." Decolonization and After, ed. W. H . Morris-Jones and
Georges Fischer. Frank Cass, London.
Miliband, Ralph, and John Saville (eds.). 1964. The Socialist Register, 1964. Merlin Press, London.
Miller, Floyd. 1975. The Search for a Black Nationality. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Miller, John Chester. 1977, The Wolfby the Ears. New American Library, New York.
Miller, Stuart. 1969. The Unwelcome Immigrant. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Moon, Henri Lee (ed.). 1972. The Emerging Thought of W E. B. Du Bois. Simon and Schuster, New York.
Moore, Richard B. 1966-67. "On Barbadians and Minding Other People's Business." New World Quarterly
3, nos. 1-2, Dead Season and Croptime.
-. 1970. "Du Bois and Pan-Africa." Black Titan: W; E. B. Du Bois, ed. John Henrick Clarke et al. Beacon
Press, Boston.
Moore, R. Lawrence. 1969. "Flawed Fraternity-American Socialist Response to the Negro, 1901-lylz."
The Historian 32, no. 1.
Moreau de Saint-Mery, M. L. E. 1973. "The Border Maroons of Saint-Domingue: Le Maniel." Maroon
Societies, ed. Richard Price. Anchor, Garden City.
Morgan, Edmund. 1975. American Slavery, American Freedom. W. W. Norton, New York.
Morgan, Gordon D. 1976. "In Memorium: Oliver C. Cox, 1901-1974.'' Monthly Review, May.
Morison, Samuel Eliot. 1942. Admiral of the Ocean Sea. 2 vols. Little, Brown, Boston.
-. 1952. "Columbus as Navigator." Studi Colombiana, vol, 2. Stabilimento Arti Grafiche ed. Affini,
Genova.
Morris-Jones, W. H., and Georges Fischer (eds.). 1980. Decolonization and After. Frank Cass, London.
Moses, W. J. 1978. The Golden Age of Black Nationalism, 1850-1925. Archon Books, Hamden.
Mosse, George. 1978. Toward the Final Solution. J. M. Dent and Sons, London.
Mott, Frank L. 1939. A History ofAmerican Magazints, 1741-1850, vol. 1. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Mullin, Gerald (Michael). 1972. Flight and Rebellion. Oxford University Press, New York.
Murray, A. Victor. 1938. "Missions and Indirect Administration." Oxford University Summer School on
Colonial Administration, Second Session, 27 June-8 July 1938. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Murray, D. R. 1971. "Statistics of the Slave Trade in Cuba, 1790-1867." Journal ofLatin American Studies 3,
no. 2.
Murray, Margaret. 1964. The Splendour That Was Egypt. Sidgwick and Jackson, London (orig. 1949).
Murray-Brown, Jeremy. 1974. Kenyatta. FontanaICollins, London.
Musson, A. E. 1975. "Continental Influences on the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain." Great Britain
and Her World, 1750-1914, ed. Barrie Ratcliffe. Manchester University Press, Manchester.
Myers, Eugene A. 1964.Arabic Thought and the Western World in the Golden Age ofIslam. Frederick Ungar
Publishing, New York.
Nairn, Tom. 1975. "The Modern Janus." New Left Review, no. 94.
Naison, Mark. 1971. "Marxism and Black Radicalism in America: Notes on a Long (and Continuing) Journey." Radical America 5, no. 3.
-. 1974. "Communism and Black Nationalism in the Depression: The Case of Harlem." Journal of Ethnic Studies, Summer.
-. 1978a. "Harlem Communists and the Politics of Black Protest." Marxist Perspectives I, no. 3.
-. 1978b. "Historical Notes on Blacks and American Communism: The Harlem Experience." Science
and Society 42, no. 3.
-. 1981."Communism and Harlem Intellectuals in the Popular Front: Anti-Fascism and the Politics of
Black Culture." Journal of Ethnic Studies 9, no. 1.
Nash, A. E. Keir. 1979. "Reason of Slavery: Understanding the Judicial Role in the Peculiar Institution."
Vanderbilt Law Review 32, no. 1.
Nearing, Scott. 1969. Black America. Schocken, New York (orig. 1929).
Negro in Virginia, The. n.d. Virginia Writers' Project, Hastings House, New York.
Negro Nurse in Republican Spain, A. 1977. The Negro Committee to Aid Spain, reissued by the Veterans of
the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, New York (orig. 1938).
Nettl, Peter. 1969. Rosa Luxemburg. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Newton, Arthur Percival (ed.). 1932. The Great Age of Discovery. University of London Press, London.
412

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Nicholls, David. 1974. "A Work of Combat: Mulatto Historians and the Haitian Past, 1847-1867." Journal
of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 16, no. 1 .
-. 1979. From Dessalines to Duvalier. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Nichols, Charles (ed.). 1972. Black Men in Chains. Lawrence Hill, New York.
Nichols, Roy. 1962. The Disruption of American Democracy. Collier Books, New York.
Nicoll, Allardyce (ed.). 1964. Shakespeare in His Own Age, Shakespeare Survey 17. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Nolan, William. 1951. Communism versus the Negro. Henry Regnery, Chicago.
Norman, Edward. 1971. A History ofModern Ireland. Allen LaneIPenguin Press, London.
Nossiter, T. J. 1972. "Shopkeeper Radicalism in the Nineteenth Century." Imagination and Precision in the
Social Sciences, ed. T. J. Nossiter, A. H. Hanson, and Stein Rokhan. Faber and Faber, London.
Nossiter, T. J., A. H. Hanson, and Stein Rokkan (eds.). 1972. Imagination and Precision in the Social Sciences. Faber and Faber, London.
Nwafor, Azinna. 1972. Introduction. Pan-Africanism or Communism, George Padmore. Doubleday, New
York.
Nyerere, Julius. 1979. Ujamaa: Essays on Socialism. Oxford University Press, Dar es Salaam.
Oates, Stephen. 1970. To Purge This Land with Blood. Harper Torchbooks, New York.
Obichere, Boniface. 1969. "African History and Western Civilization." Black Studies in the University, ed.
A. Robinson, C. Foster, and D. Ogilvie. Bantam, New York.
O'Brien, James, et al. 1970. "'New Left Historians' of the 1960's." Radical America, November.
Odum, Howard (ed.). 1927. American Masters of Social Science. Holt, New York.
Offiong, Daniel A. 1976. "The Cheerful School and the Myth of the Civilizing Mission of Colonial Imperialism." Pan-African Journal 9, no. l.
Okoye, Nwabueze F. 1980. "Chattel Slavery as the Nightmare of the American Revolutionaries." William
and Mary Quarterly 37, no. I.
Olela, Henry. 1979. "The African Foundations of Greek Philosophy." African Philosophy: An Introduction,
ed. Richard A. Wright. University Press of America, Washington, D.C.
-. 1981. From Ancient Africa to Ancient Greece. Select Publishing, Atlanta.
Origo, Iris. 1955. "The Domestic Enemy: The Eastern Slaves in Tuscany in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth
Centuries." Speculum 30, no. 3.
-. 1957. The Merchant of Prato. Knopf, New York.
Orum, Thomas T. 1975. "The Politics of Color: The Racial Dimension of Cuban Politics during the Early
Republican Years, 1900-igiz." Unpublished Ph.D. diss., Department of History, New York University.
Ott, T. 0.1973. The Haitian Revolution. University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.
Owens, Leslie Howard. 1976. This Species of Property. Oxford University Press, New York.
Padmore, George. 1971. The Life and Struggles ofNegro Toilers. Sun Dance Press, Hollywood.
-. i972a. Africa and WorldPeace. Frank Cass, London (orig. 1937).
-. 1972b. Pan-Africanism or Communism. Doubleday, New York.
Padover, Saul (ed.). 1971. Karl Marx: On Revolution. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Painter, Nell Irvin. 1976. Exodusters: Black Migration to Kansas after Reconstruction. Knopf, New York.
Palmer, Colin. 1975. "Religion and Magic in Mexican Slave Society, 1570-1650:' Race and Slavery in the
Western Hemisphere: Quantitative Studies, ed. Stanley L. Engerman and Eugene Genovese. Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
Palmer, R. R., with Joel Colton. 1959. A History ofModern Europe. Knopf, New York.
Pares, Richard. 1960. Merchants and Planters, Economic History Review Supplement, n0.e.
Parker, William. 1972. "Fugitives Resist Kidnapping." Black Men in Chains, ed. Charles Nichols. Lawrence
Hill, New York.
Parris, E. Elliot. 1981. "Minty Alley." Urgent Tasks 12.
Parry, Benita. 1972. Delusions and Discoveries. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Parry, J. H. 1966. The Establishment of the European Hegemony: 1415-1715. Harper and Row, New York.
Passmore, John. 1970. The Perfectibility ofMan. Duckworth, London.
Patterson, H. Orlando. 1969. The Sociology of Slavery. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, Rutherford.
-. 1973. "Slavery and Slave Revolts: A Sociohistorical Analysis of the First Maroon War, 1665-1740."
Maroon Societies, ed. Richard Price, Anchor, Garden City.
Peires, J. B. 1979. "Nxele, Ntsidana and the Origins of the Xhosa Religious Reaction." Journal ofAfrican
History 20, no. 1.
Pelling, Henry. 1958. "The Early History of the Communist Party of Great Britain, 1920-9:' Transactions
of the Royal Historical Society, 5th ser., vol. 8.
-. 1976. A History of British Trade Unionism. Penguin, Harmondsworth.
Perez, Louis A. 1976. Army Politics in Cuba, 1898-1958. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh.
Perham, M. 1938. "British Native Administration." Oxford University Summer School on Colonial Administration, Second Session, 27 June-8 July 1938. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

423

Pethybridge, Roger. 1977. The Social Prelude to Stalinism. Macmillan, London.
Peyre, Henri. 1968. Historical and Critical Essays. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Peytraud, Lucien. 1897. "L'Esclavage aux Antilles Francais avant 1789 d'apres des documents inedits des
Archives Coloniales." These Presentee a la FacultC des Lettres de Paris, Paris.
Piccone, Paul. 1971. "Reading the Crisis." Telos,no. 8.
Pierson, Stanley. 1973. Marxism and the Origins of British Socialism. Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Pinckney, Darryl. 1977. "Richard Wright: The Unnatural History of a Native Son." Village Voice, 4 July.
Pipes, Daniel. 1980. "Black Soldiers in Early Muslim Armies." InternationalJournal ofAfrican Historical
Studies 13, no. 1.
Pirenne, Henri. 1937. Economic and Social History ofMedieval Europe. Harcourt, Brace and World, New
York.
-. 1948. Medieval Cities, Their Origins and the Revival of Trade. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
-. 1968. Mohammed and Charlemagne. Unwin University Books, London.
Polanyi, Karl. 1957. The Great Transformation. Beacon Press, Boston.
Poole, Reginald. 1960. Illustrations of the History of Medieval Thought and Learning. Dover, New York.
Poppino, Rollie. 1968. Brazil, the Land and People. Oxford University Press, New York.
Post, Charles. 1982. "The American Road to Capitalism." New Left Review, no. 133.
Post, Ken. 1978. Arise Ye Starvelings: TheJamaican Labour Rebellion of 1938 and Its Aftermath. Martinus
Nijhoff, The Hague.
Postan, M. 1939. "The Fifteenth Century." Economic History Review 9, no. z.
Power, Eileen, and M. M. Postan (eds.). 1951. Studies in English Trade in the Fifteenth Century. Routledge
and Kegan Paul, London.
Prawar, S. S. 1976. Karl Marx and World Literature. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Prestage, Edgar. 1932. "Vasco da Gama and the Way to the Indies." The Great Age of Discovery, ed. Arthur
Percival Newton. University of London, London.
-. 1934. "The Anglo-Portuguese Alliance." Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 4th ser., vol. 17.
Price, Richard (ed.). 1973. Maroon Societies. Anchor, Garden City.
-. 1976. The Guiana Maroons: A Historical and Bibliographical Introduction. Johns Hopkins University
Press, Baltimore.
Procacci, Giuliano. 1970. The History of the Italian People. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London.
Proceedings of a General Court Martial Held at the Colony House in George Town on Monday the 13th Day
of October 1823, Edinburgh Review, xl,89, March 1824.
"Punishment for a Negro Rebel." 1902. Documents, William and Mary Quarterly, ser. 1, vol. lo, no. 3.
Quarles, Benjamin. 1958. "Lord Dunmore as Liberator." William and Mary Quarterly 15, no. 4.
-. 1961. The Negro in the American Revolution. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.
-. 1974. Allies for Freedom: Blacks and John Brown. Oxford University Press, New York.
"Racism, Intelligence and the Working Class." n.d. [post-19731.Published by the Party for Workers Power,
Boston.
Rae, John. 1981. "Play Up, Play Up." Times Literary Supplement, z October.
Ramos, Arthur. 1951. The Negro in Brazil. Associated Publishers, Washington D.C. (orig. 1939).
Ramsey, P. 1960. "The European Economy in the Sixteenth Century." Economic History Review, zd ser.,
vol. 12, no. 3.
Ranger, T. 0.1967. Revolt in Southern Rhodesia, 1896-7. Heinemann, London.
-. 1977. "The People in African Resistance: A Review." Journal of Southern African Studies 4, no. 1.
Raskin, Jonah. 1971. The Mythology of Imperialism. Dell, New York.
Ratcliffe, Barrie. 1975. Great Britain and Her World, 1750-1914. Manchester University Press, Manchester.
Rau, Virginia. 1957. "A Family of Italian Merchants in Portugal in the Fifteenth Century: The Lomellini."
Studi in Onore de Armando Sapori, vol. 1. Instituto Editoriale Cisalpino, Milano.
Rawick, George. 1976. Interview with C. J. Robinson, Winter.
Reckord, Mary. 1968. "The Jamaican Slave Rebellion of 1831." Past and Present, no. 40.
Record, Wilson. 1971. The Negro and the Communist Party. Atheneum, New York.
Reddick, Lawrence. 1937. "A New Interpretation for Negro History." Journal ofNegro History 21, no. 1.
Redkey, Edwin. 1969. Black Exodus. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Reich, Wilhelm. 1972. "What IS Class Consciousness?" Sex-Pol: Essays 1929-1934, ed. Lee Baxandall. Vintage, New York.
Rensberger, Boyce. 1979. "Nubian Monarchy Called Oldest." New York Times, 1March.
Return of Trials of Slaves: Jamaica, 1814-1818. Colonial Office ~7-147.Public Records Office, London.
Richard, Jean. 1969. "The Mongols and the Franks." Journal ofAsian History 3, no. 1.
Riva, Francisco Perez de la. 1973. "Cuban Palenquesl' Maroon Societies, ed. Richard Price. Anchor, Garden
City.
Roark, James. 1977. Masters without Slaves. W. W. Norton, New York.

424

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Robinson, Armstead, Craig Foster, and Donald Ogilvie (eds.). 1969. Black Studies in the University. Bantam, New York.
Robinson, Cedric J. 1978. "The Emergent Marxism of Richard Wright's Ideology." Race and Class 19, no. 3.
--. 1979. "A Case of Mistaken Identity." Paper presented at the African Studies Association Conference,
Los Angeles, 1 November.
-. i98oa. The Terms of Order. State University of New York Press, Albany.
-. 1980b. "Notes Toward a 'Native' Theory of History." Review4, no. 1.
-. 1981. "Amilcar Cabral and the Dialectic of Portuguese Colonialism:' Radical America 15, no. 3.
Robinson, R. E., and J. A. Gallagher (with Alice Denny). 1961. Africa and the Victorians. Macmillan,
London.
Rodinson, Maxime. 1974a. Mohammed. Vintage, New York.
-.
1974b. "The Western Image and Western Studies of Islam." The Legacy of Islam, ed. Joseph Schacht
and C. E. Bosworth, Oxford University Press, London.
Rodney, Walter. 1965. "Portuguese Attempts at Monopoly on the Upper Guinea Coast, 1580-1650.'' Journal of African History 6, no. 3.
-. 1969. "Upper Guinea and the Significance of the Origins of Africans Enslaved in the New World."
Journal of Negro History 54, no. 4.
--. 1972. HOWEurope UnderdevelopedAfrica. Bogle-L'Ouverture, London.
Rodrigues, Jose Honorio. 1965. Brazil and Africa. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Rogers, Francis M. 1964. "The Attraction of the East and Early Portuguese Discoveries." Luso-Brazilian
Review 1, no. 1.
Rogin, Michael P. 1967. The Intellectuals and McCarthy. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Rosenberg, Arthur. 1934. A History of Bolshevism. Oxford University Press, London.
Rotberg, Robert (ed.). 1971. Rebellion in Black Africa. Oxford University Press, London.
Rotter, Gernot. 1967. "Die Stellung des Negers in der islamisch-arabischen Geselschaft bis XVI Jahrhundert." Unpublished dissertation.
Rougemont, Denis de. 1966. The Idea of Europe. Macmillan, New York.
Rout, Leslie R., Jr. 1976. The African Experience in Spanish America. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Roux, Edward. 1964. Time Longer Than Rope. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
Roy, M. N. 1976. Fascism. Best Books, Jijnasa.
Royce, Edward. 1980. "Genovese on Slave Revolts and Weiner on the Postbellum South." Insurgent Sociologist,no. lo.
Rubin, Vera, and Arthur Tuden (eds.). 1977. Comparative Perspectives on Slavery in New World Plantation
Societies. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 292.
Ruchames, Louis. 1969. Racial Thought in America. Grosset and Dunlap, New York.
Rude, George. 1964. The Crowd in History. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Russell-Wood, A. J. R. 1968. Fidalgos and Philanthropists. University of California Press, Berkeley.
-. 1974. "Black and Mulatto Brotherhoods in Colonial Brazil: A Study of Collective Behavior." Hispanic
American Historical Review 54, no. 4.
Said, Edward. 1978. Orientalism. Pantheon, New York.
Saignes, Miguel Acosta. 1973. "Life in a Venezuelan Cumbe." Maroon Societies, ed. Richard Price. Anchor,
Garden City.
Samaroo, Brinsley. 1972. "The Trinidad Workingmen's Association and the Origins of Popular Protest in a
Crown Colony." Social and Economic Studies 21, no. 2.
Samuel, Raphael. 1980. "British Marxist Historians." New Left Review, no. 120.
-(ed.). 1981. People's History and Socialist Theory. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Sanchez-Albornoz, Nicolas. 1974. The Population of Latin America: A History. University of California
Press, Berkeley.
Sanderson, Lillian. 1975.
* . - "Education and Administrative Control in Colonial Sudan and Northern
Nigeria.'' African Affairs 74, no. 297.
Sandford, Eva. n.d. The Mediterranean World in Ancient Times. Publisher unlisted.
Sankey, Veronica. 1980. Interview with C. J. Robinson. Brighton, England, 20 July.
Saunders, J. V. D. 1959. "The Brazilian Negro. The Americas 15, no. 3.
Scelle, Georges. 1906. Histoire Politique de la Traite Negriere aux Indes de Castille. 2 vols. Larose and
Forcel, Paris.
-. 1910. "The Slave-Tradein the Spanish Colonies of America: The Assiento." American Journal of
International Law 4, no. 3.
Schacht, Joseph, and C. E. Bosworth (eds.). 1974. The Legacy of Islam. Oxford University Press, London.
Schirokauer, Arno Lassalle. 1931. The Power ofIllusion and the Illusion of Power. George Allen and Unwin,
London.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

425

Schuler, Monica. 1970. "Ethnic Slave Rebellions in the Caribbean and the Guianas." Journal of Social History 3, no. 4.
-. 1980. Alas, Alas, Kongo: A Social History of Indentured African Immigration into Jamaica, 1841-1865.
Tohns Hovkins University Press, Baltimore.
Schumpeter, J. A. 1965. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. Unwin, London.
Schwartz, Stuart. 1970. "The Mocambo. Slave Resistance in Colonial Bahia." Journal of Social History3,
no. 4.
Scott, Ian. 1978. "Middle Class Politics in Zambia." African Affairsn, no. 308
Seligman, Charles C. 1933. Egypt and Negro Africa. Routledge and Sons, London.
Sellin, J. Thorsten. 1976. Slavery and the Penal System. Elsevier, New York.
Semmel, Bernard. 1963.Jamaican Blood and Victorian Conscience. Houghton Mifflin, Cambridge.
Shapiro, Leonard. 1977. "Two Years that Shook the World." New York Review of Boob, 31 March.
Sharp, William F. 1975. "The Profitability of Slavery in the Colombian Choco, 1680-1810:' Hispanic American Historical Review55, no. 3.
Shepperson, George. 1972. "Garvey as Pan-Africanist." Marcus Garvey, ed. E. David Cronon. PrenticeHall, Englewood Cliffs.
-. 1980. "Ourselves as Others." Review4, no. 1.
Shepperson, George, and Thomas Price. 1958. Independent African. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
Shillington, Violet. 1906. "The Beginnings of the Anglo-Portuguese Alliance." Transactions ofthe Royal
Historical Society 20.
Shyllon, Folarin. 1981. "The Black Presence and Experience in Britain: An Analytical Overview." Paper
presented to the International Conference on the History of Blacks in Britain, University of London, 30
September.
Silverberg, Robert. 1972. The Realm of Prester John. Doubleday, Garden City.
Singh, Raman K. 1974. "Marxism in Richard Wright's Fiction." Indian Journal ofAmerican Studies 4, nos.
1-2.

Skinner, Elliot. 1980. "The Persistence of Psychological and Structural Dependence after Colonialism."
Decolonization and Dependence, ed. Aguibou Yansane. Greenwood Press, Westport.
Slave Insurrections, Selected Documents. 1970. Negro University Press, Westport (orig. 1860).
Slave Rebellion Trials:Jamaica. 1832. Colonial Office 137-185, Public Records Office, London.
Slessarev, Vsevolod. 1959. Prester John: The Letter and the Legend. University of Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis.
Small, Richard. 1981. "The Training of an Intellectual, the Making of a Marxist." Urgent Tasks 12.
Smith, Abbot E. 1947. Colonists in Bondage: White Servitude and Convict Labor in America, 1607-1776.
University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.
Smith, Anthony. 1971. Theories ofNationalism. Harper and Row, New York.
Smith, David. 1978. Socialist Propaganda in the Twentieth-Century British Novel. Macmillan, London.
Smith, T. Lynn. 1966. "The Racial Composition of the Population of Colombia." Journal of Inter-American
Studies 8, no. 2.
Snowden, Frank. 1970. Blacks in Antiquity. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Snyder, Louis. 1939. Race. Longmans, Green and Co., New York.
-. 1962. The Idea of Racialism. D. Van Nostrand, Princeton.
Soboul, Albert. 1974. The French Revolution, 1787-1799. Random House, New York.
Somit, Albert, and Joseph Tannenhaus. 1967. The Development of (American) Political Science: From Burgess to Behavioralism. Allyn and Bacon, Boston.
"Special Editorial Note for the People South of Mason and Dixon's Line, A," 1854. Putnam's Monthly3,
no. 15.
Stalin, J. V. 1953. "Marxism and the National Question." Works, vol. 11. Foreign Languages, Moscow.
Stampp, Kenneth. 1956. The Peculiar Institution. Vintage, New York.
Starobin, Joseph. 1972. American Communism in Crisis, 1943-1957. University of California Press,
Berkeley.
Starobin, Robert. 1970. Industrial Slavery in the Old South. Oxford University Press, New York.
Stein, Robert. 1980. "Mortality in the Eighteenth-Century French Slave Trade." Journal ofAfrican History
21, no. 1.
Stockwell, John. 1979. In Search of Enemies. Futura Publications, London.
Stoddard, T. Lothrop. 1914. The French Revolution in Sun Domingo. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
Stokes, Rose Pastor. 1923. "The Communist International and the Negro." The Worker, lo March.
Stolberg, Ben. 1935. "Black Chauvinism." The Nation, 15 May.
Stone, Carl. 1973. Class, Race and Political Behaviour in Urban Jamaica. Press University of the West Indies, Mona.
Stone, Norman. 1980. "The Many Tragedies of Haiti." Times Literary Supplement, 15 February.
426

BIBLIOGRAPHY

St. Pierre, Maurice. 1973. "West Indian Cricket-A Socio-Historical Appraisal, Part 1." Caribbean Quarterly 9, no. 2.
Strauss, Eric. 1951. Irish Nationalism and British Democracy. Columbia University Press, New York.
Street, Brian. 1975. The Savage in Literature. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Stephenson, Wendell Holmes. 1964. Southern History in the Making. Louisiana State University Press,
Baton Rouge.
Strachey, John. 1939. "Communism in Great Britain." Current History, January.
Stuart, James. 1913. A History of the Zulu Rebellion. Macmillan, London.
Studi Colombiana, vol. 2.1952. Stabilimento Arti Grafiche (ed.) Affini, Genova.
Styron, William. 1978. "Hell Reconsidered." New York Review of Books 25, no. 11.
Sweezy, Paul. 1971. "Workers and the Third World." The Revival ofAmerican Socialism, ed. George Fischer.
Oxford University Press, New York.
Sweezy, Paul, et al. 1976. The Transition from Feudalism to Capitalism. New Left Books, London.
Symons, Julian. 1975. The Thirties: A Dream Revolved. Faber and Faber, London.
Tassin, Algernon. 1916. The Magazine in America. Dodd, Mead, New York.
Taussig, Michael. 1979. "Black Religion and Resistance in Colombia: Three Centuries of Social Struggle in
the Cauca Valley." Marxist Perspectives 2, no. 2.
Tawney, R. H. 1950. "A History of Capitalism." Economic History Review, 2d ser., vol. 2, no. 3.
Taylor, A. E. 1966. Pluto, the Man and His Work. World Publishing, Cleveland.
Taylor, A. J. 1960. "Progress and Poverty in Britain." History 45, February.
Taylor, Theman. 1981. "Cyril Briggs and the African Blood Brotherhood: Effects of Communism on Black
Nationalism, 1919-35." Unpublished Ph.D. diss.
Taylor, William B. 1970. "The Foundation of Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe de 10s Morenos de Amapa."
The Americas 26, no. 4.
Thomas, Hugh. 1961. The Spanish Civil War. Harper and Row, New York.
Thomas, John L. 1963. The Liberator: William Lloyd Garrison. Little, Brown, Boston.
Thompson, E. P. 1966. The Making of the English Working Class. Vintage, New York.
-. 1967. "Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism." Past and Present, no. 38.
-. 1974. Whigs and Hunters. Pantheon, New York.
-. 1978. The Poverty of Theory. Monthly Review Press, New York.
-. 1981. "The Politics of Theory." People's History and Socialist Theory, ed. Raphael Samuel. Routledge
and Kegan Paul, London.
Thomson, George. 1977. The First Philosophers. Lawrence and Wishart, London (orig. 1955).
Thorpe, Earl(ie) E. 1970. Black Historians. William Morrow, New York.
Thrupp, S. 1951. "The Grocers of London: A Study of Distributive Trade." Studies in English Trade in the
Fifteenth Century, ed. Eileen Power and M. M. Postan. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Tigar, Michael, and Madeline Levy. 1977. Law and the Rise of Capitalism. Monthly Review Press, New
York.
Times Literary Supplement. 1973. Articles by E. E. Evans-Pritchard, M. Douglas, Edmund Leach, Lucy
Mair, and Rodney Needham, 6 July.
Trelease, Allen. 1971. White Terror. Harper Torchbooks, New York.
Trevor-Roper, Hugh. 1963a. "The Rise of Christian Europe I: The Great Recovery." The Listener, 28
November.
-. 1963b. "The Rise of Christian Europe: The Dark Ages." The Listener, 12 December.
-. 1963C. "The Rise of Christian Europe: The Crusades." The Listener, 19 December.
-. 1963d. "The Rise of Christian Europe: The Medieval Renaissance.'' The Listener, 26 December.
-. 1965. The Rise of Christian Europe. Harcourt, Brace and World, New York.
Trotman, D. V. 1976. "The Yoruba and Orisha Worship in Trinidad and British Guiana, 1838-1870." African Studies Review 19, no. 2.
Trotsky, Leon. 1964. The Writings ofLeon Trotsky, vol. 6. Martin Secker and Warburg, London.
Tuchman, Barbara. 1977. A Distant Mirror. Ballantine Books, New York.
Tucker, Robert. 1971. Philosophy and Myth in Karl Marx. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
-(ed.). 1972. The Marx-Engels Reader. W. W. Norton, New York.
-. 1977. Stalinism. W. W. Norton, New York.
Tutuola, Amos. 1954. My Life in the Bush of the Ghosts. Faber and Faber, London.
Ullmann, Walter. 1965. The Growth of Papal Government in the Middle Ages. Methuen, London.
"Uncle Tom at Home." 1856. Putnam's Monthly 8, no. 43.
Uribe, Jaramillo. 1964. "La poblacion indigene de Colombia en el momento de la Conquista y sus transformaciones posteriores." Anuario Colombiano de historia social y de la cultura 1, no. 2.
Vansina, Jan. 1966. Kingdoms of the Savanna. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison.
Verlinden, Charles. 1953. "Italian Influence in Iberian Colonization." Hispanic American Historical Review
33, no. 2.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

427

-.

1955. L'esclavage dans 1'Europe medievale, vol. 1. Peninsule Iberique, Bugge, France.
1958. "Navigateurs, marchands et colons italiens au service de la decouverte et de la colonisation
portugaise sous Henri le Navigateur." Le Moyen Age 64, no. 4.
-.
1970. The Beginnings of Modern Colonization. Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Vidal, Gore. 1981. "The Second American Revolution?" New York Review of Books, 5 February.
Vila, Enriqueta. 1977. "The Large-Scale Introduction of Africans into Veracruz and Cartagena." Comparative Perspectives on Slavery in New World Plantation Societies, ed. Vera Rubin and Arthur Tuden. Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences 292.
Vincent, Theodore. 1972. Black Power and the Garvey Movement. Ramparts, San Francisco.
Walden, Daniel (ed.). 1972. W E. B. DU Bois: The Crisis Writings. Fawcett, Greenwich.
Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1974. The Modern World System. Academic Press, New York.
-. 1980. The Modern World System II. Academic Press, New York.
Ward, Sir Adolphus W. 1917. Germany 1815-1890, vol. 2. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Ward, J. T. (ed.). 1970. Popular Movements c. 1830-1850. Macmillan, London.
-. 1974. Chartism. Harper and Row, New York.
Webb, Constance. 1968. Richard Wright. Putnam, New York.
Webb, R. 1971. The British Working Class Reader. Kelley, New York.
Weir, Stanley. 1981. "Revolutionary Artist." Urgent Tasks 12.
Weisbord, Robert. 1973. Ebony Kinship. Greenwood Press, Westport.
Westermann, William L. 1955. The Slave Systems of Greek and Roman Antiquity. American Philosophical
Society.
Widgery, David. 1981. "A Meeting with Comrade James." Urgent Task 12.
Wiecek, William. 1978. "Slavery and Abolition before the United States Supreme Court, 1820-1860.'' Journal of American History 65, no. I.
Wilks, Ivor. 1975.Asante in the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge University Press, London.
Williams, Eric. 1962. History of the People of Trinidad and Tobago. People's National Movement Publishing
Co., Port-of-Spain.
-.
1966. Capitalism and Slavery. Capricorn Books, New York.
-. 1969. Inward Hunger. Andre Deutsch, London.
-. 1970. From Columbus to Castro. Harper and Row, New York.
Williams, George Washington. 1883. A History of the Negro Race in America from 1619 to 1880. G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York.
Williams, Raymond. 1971. "Literature and Sociology." New Left Review, no. 67.
Williams, William Appleman. 1980. "Empire as a Way of Life." The Nation, 2-9 August.
Wilson, Basil. 1981. "The Caribbean Revolution." Urgent Tasks 12.
Wilson, Carus. 1951. "The Overseas Trade of Bristol." Studies in English Trade in the Fifteenth Century, ed.
Eileen Power and M. M. Postan. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Wish, Harvey. 1970. "American Slave Insurrections before 1861." Justice Denied, ed. William Chace and Peter Collier. Harcourt, Brace and World, New York.
Wolin, Sheldon. 1960. The Politics of Vision. Little, Brown, Boston.
Wood, Donald. 1968. Trinidad in Transition: The Ears after Slavery. Oxford University Press, for the Institute of Race Relations, London.
Wood, Forrest. 1968. Black Scare: The Racist Response to Emancipation and Reconstruction. University of
California Press, Berkeley.
Wood, Neal. 1959. Communism and British Intellectuals. Victor Gollancz, London.
Wood, Peter. 1975. Black Majority. Norton, New York.
Woodward, C. Vann. 1963. Tom Watson:Agrarian Rebel. Oxford University Press, New York.
Wright, Irene. 1930. "The Spanish Resistance to the English Occupation of Jamaica, 1655-1660." Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 4th ser., vol. 12.
Wright, Richard. 1944. "I Tried to Be a Communist." Atlantic Monthly, August and September.
-. 1945. Black Boy. Harper and Row, New York.
-1953. The Outsider. Harper, New York.
-1954. Black Power. Harper and Brothers, New York.
-1957. White Man Listen! Doubleday, Garden City.
-. 1960. "The Voiceless Ones." Saturday Review, 16 April.
-. 1977. American Hunger. Harper and Row, New York.
-. 1980. "Blueprint for Negro Writing." Race and Class 21, no. 4 (orig. 1937).
Wright, Richard R. 1902. "Negro Companions of the Spanish Explorers." American Anthropologist 4, no. 2.
Wynter, Sylvia. 1981. "In Quest of Matthew Bondsman: Some Cultural Notes on the Jamesian Journey."
Urgent Tasks 12.
Yansane, Aguibou (ed.). 1980. Decolonization and Dependence. Greenwood Press, Westport.
Yates, Frances A. 1979. The Occult Philosophy in the Elizabethan Age. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.

-.

428 B I B L I O G R A P H Y

Yates, Names. 1978. Interview with C. J. Robinson. Binghamton, New York, 26 April.
Zambardino, Rudolph A. 1980. "Mexico's Population in the Sixteenth Century: Demographic Anomaly or
Mathematical Illusion?" Journal of Interdisciplinary History 11, no. I.
Zeller, Edward. 1948. Outline of the History of Greek Philosophy. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Zinn, Howard. 1970. The Politics ofHistory. Beacon Press, Boston.
-. 1980. A People's History of the United States. Harper and Row, New York.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

419

INDEX

Abbott, Robert, 212-13
Abolition: of British slave trade, 157-58; of British
slavery, 164
Absolute state, 21-22; and alien mercenaries,
22-23,323 (n. 99); and banditry, 323 (n. 98)
Africa, 270; and Mediterranean civilizations,
83-85; and medieval Europe, 85-87; in European thought, 74-81,342 (n. 53); origins of slave
laborers, 117-20; and colonialism, 311-13
African Blood Brotherhood, 198,zi3,215-18,227,
385 (n. 116)
African cultures: and Brazilian slave revolts,
153-55; and resistance, 165-66,354 (n. 2)
African history: denial of, 336 (n. 6)
African resistance. See African cultures: and
resistance
African slavery: and Islam, 88-89
African soldiers: in World War I, 253-54
Afro-Americans soldiers: in World War I, 253
Afro-West Indian Literary Society, 260
America: origins of nationalist myths, 186; and
workers' consciousness, 200-203; and immigrant workers, 210-11; origins of socialism in,
210-11

-colonial: and Amerindians, 339 (n. 25); and
concern with Black resistance, 340 (n. 45); racial
characteristics in, 78-81
American Communist Party (CPUSA), 197,198,
208, 217,218, 223,226-27, 231-32, 255, 279,29297,380 (n. 59); and Comintern, 211-12; and Jews,
211-12,384 (n. 95); and Blacks, 382 (n. 77), 386
(n. 124); and foreign-language federations, 384
(nn. 97,98); and self-determination, 388 (n. 148)
American Indians, 77,125-26,130-31,339 (n. 25),
356 (nn. 23,26,27.28), 357 (n. 371,374 (n. 7)
American Negro Academy, 191-93
American Revolution: and class, 339 (n. 29)
American Trotskyist movement. See Trotskyism:
American
Anglo-Saxonism, 34,36327 (n. 431,328 (n. 71), 373
(n. 4); and Socialism, 258-60,395 (n. 94)
Aptheker, Herbert, 369 (n. 1)
Argentina, 129-30
Arnold, Matthew, 255,399 (n. 157)
Arnold, Thomas, 266,268
Athleticism: in ancient Greece, 267-68; in Britain,
268-69

Australia, 253
Azikiwe, Nnamdi, 260
Babeuf, Francois-Noel (Gracchus), 49-51,331
(nn. ~ 5 ~ 3 2 )
Baldwin, James, 289,305
"Baptist War" (Jamaica), 161-64
Barbados: slave revolts in, 158-60
Belgium, 253
Besant, Annie, 258
Beyond a Boundary, 266-69,285
Black Belt thesis, 295
Black colleges and universities, 372 (n. 22), 377
(n. 33)
Black emigration, 335 (n. 3)
Black historiography. See Historiography: Black
The Black lacobins, 265,274-78,285
Black labor: migration of, in America, 212-13. See
also Slaves-labor
Blackman, Peter, 261,308,399 (n. 165)
Black migration, 194-95
Black petit bourgeoisie, 312; and colonialism,
178-81; and racial consciousness, 189,376
(n. 25); and ideology, 191-95; and capitalism,
206-7; in Cuba and Brazil, 371 (n. 19)
Black radical intelligentsia, 287-88; in Britain,
260-70; and British Intelligence, 263-64; and
socialism, 313
Black radicals: and Black petit bourgeoisie, 178-81;
development of, 181-82
Black radical theory, 5
Black radical tradition, 3,p-73,~38-40,270,27~,
285-86,287,288,j09-18,334 (n. I); resistance
in, 4-5; as negation of Western civilization,
72-73; and violence, 167-69,368 (n. 1); and
revolutionary consciousness, 167-71,275-76;
and intelligentsia, 170-71; misperceptions of,
175-76; and slavery, 177; and Du Bois, 194-95; in
Trinidad, 245-46; and C. L. R. James, 272-74,
285-86; and Richard Wright, 297-301
Black Reconstruction, 228-31, 234-39, 270-71,389
(n. 188)
Blassingame, John, 123-25,354 (n. 7)
"Blueprint for Negro Writing," 291-92
Blyden, Edward Wilmot, 217,377 (n. 39)
Boggs, Grace (Lee), 280,285
Bone, Robert, 290

Boukman (maroon), 147,148
Bourgeoisie: first development, 13-16; first
destruction of, 17-18; rise of modern, 18-21; the
state and modern, 20-21
Braudel, Fernand, 25,102,177,323 (n. 88), 350
(n. 30)
Brazil, 140, 310, 311; and slave rebellions, 132-33,
152-55; slavery in, 149-55; and slave trade, 364
(nn. 195, 200); African origins of slaves, 364
(nn. 202,204); and Black petit bourgeoisie, 371
(n. 19)
Briggs, Cyril, 216-18, 224,385 (nn. 111,116)
Britain, 260-70,275; Blacks residing in, 260-70,
397 (nn. 116,123,127)
British colonialism: and capitalism, 112-14; and
slave labor, 116; and slave trade, 117-20; and selfgovernment, 241-42
British Colonial Office, 253, 264
British Communist Party (CPGB), 259, 261, 270,
395 (n. 102)
British imperialism, 242-43, 280-81, 390 (n. lo)
British Labour Party, 253-64 passim, 270,399
(n. 164)
British Liberal Party, 390 (n. 6)
Brockway, Fenner, 261
Browder, Earl, 227,296,371 (n. 2)
Brown, John, 76,229,311
Burgess, John, 188,374 (n. 12)
Bustamante, Alexander, 398 (n. 138)
Butler, Rab, 398 (n. 138)
Butterfield, Herbert, 343 (n. 78)
Cabral, Amilcar, 276, 401 (n. 186); on resistance,
122
Campbell, Grace, 216
Canada, 253
Capitalism: and slave labor, 4,109-20,200-203,
228-30; and feudalism, 9-10; and immigrant
labor, 23-24; and Western civilization, 24-28;
industrial, and poverty/unemployment, 31-33,
325 (n. 8); and Black labor, 308-9; and ethnic
labor, 324 (n. loo); early trade networks, 321
(n. 31); and imperialism, 370 (n. 5)
Carnegie, Andrew, 194
Carver, George Washington, 378 (n. 46)
The Casefor West-Indian SelfGovernment, 250-51
Castoriadis, Cornelius, 326 (n. 29), 402 (n. 188)
Castro, America, 92
Central Intelligence Agency, 289,404 (n. 6), 405
(n. 9)
Cksaire, Aime, 18-84
Ceylon, 254,270
Cheng Ha, 105-6,349 (n. 16)
Chile, 129-30
Chilembwe, John, 168,254,271
China, 270; explorations in Indian Ocean, 105-6,
349 (n. 26),350 (n. 28)
Chinese workers: in Trinidad, 246
Cipriani, Arthur, 254,255, 256,265
Class consciousness: among white workers in
United States, 201-3

432

INDEX

Class formation: race and ethnicity, 26-27
Claudin, Fernando, 396 (n. 114)
Cockburn, Claud, 264
Cole, G. D. H., 258
Cole, Margaret, 258
Colombia, 130,131,132,137-38,166; and marronage, 360 (nn. 104,107)
Colonial America. See American-colonial
Colonialism: documentation of, 164-65; resistance to, 165-66; contradictions of, 179-80. See
also British colonialism; Spanish colonialism
Columbus, Christopher, 106-9,125, 351 (n. 49)
Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO), 232
Constantine, Learie, 255-56, 262, 265,266
Cartes, Hernan, 130
Cox, Oliver, no, 179,182,183,288, 313, 315,316,341
(n. 471,372 (n. 32),402 (n. 188)
Creoles, French (Trinidad), 245-47,247-48,392
(n. 38)
Cricket: in Trinidad, 252,266-69; in West Indies,
407 (n. 64)
Crummell, Alexander, 191,192,193,217,370 (n. 12)
Cruse, Harold, 291,305,381 (n. 63), 387 (n. 125)
Cuba, 140-41,311; and Black petit bourgeoisie, 371
(n. 19)
Curtin, Philip, no, 112,117, 151,338 (n. 21), 352
(n. 72)
Davis, David Brion, 75-76,96,338 (nn. 14,16)
DeLeon, Daniel, 258,373 (n. 2)
Dessalines, 168, 278
Dickens, Charles, 266-67
Dam Henrique (the Navigator), 93-94345
(n. 112)
Domingo, W. A., 215-16, 217,398 (n. 138)
Doty, Edward, 216
Draper, Theodore, 334 (n. 2)
Du Bois, W. E. B., 149,182, 217, 256, 262, 271, 287,
288,291,293,300,3~5~313-14,315-16,354(n. 15),
372 (n. 271,378 (n. 521,379 (n. 53h 399 (n. 1651,
401 (n. 181);background of, 185-86; critique of
American historiography, 187-88; and American Negro Academy, 192-93; and Black radical
tradition, 194-95; at Rosenwald Conference,
197-99; and Marxism, 207-8,228-31,236-37,
380 (n. 58), 383 (n. 80); and UNIA, 214,385
(n. 107); on the "General Strike," 235-36; on
slave consciousness and rebellion, 237; and
"labor aristocracy," 328 (n. 69); and American
racism, 337 (n. 12); on Talented Tenth, 376
(n. 24); on socialism, 379 (n. 54); on working
class and war, 379 (n. 55); and Soviet Union, 379
(n. 56); on American Communist Party, 380
(n. 62); and NAACP, 381 (n. 63); on labor aristocracy, 381 (n. 72); on dictatorship of proletariat, 389 (n. 182)
Dunayevskaya, Raya, 279-80
Dunning, William, 374 (nn. 11, 12)
Duse, Mohamed Ali, 260,264
Dutt, Rajani Palme, 261

East Indians: in Trinidad, 244-46
Egypt: Blacks in, 82-84; and Mediterranean
Europe, 83-84; and Nubia, 84; impact on Greek
thought, 84,342 (n. 63)
Engels, Friedrich: and Irish labor, 39; on history
and the dialectic, 64-65; on Irish question, 328
(n. 57); on race, 328 (n. 65); on medieval rebellions, 330 (n. 7); on national state, 332 (n. 73).
See also Marx, Karl-and Engels
English working class: and class consciousness,
29-30,33-36; rebellions, 33; and trade unionism, 35-36; and ethnic divisions, 41-42; occupational divisions, 326 (n. 32)
Esteban (ladino), 129
Ethiopian Progressive Association, 260
Eurocentricism, 97-99
Europe, medieval: agriculture and trade in,
15-16; and slave trade, 16-17; peasant rebellions
in, 17-18; decline of, 17-18,320 (n. 27); and
Africa, 85-86; and Islam, 87-89,344 (n. 91), 347
(n. 119); and Mongol Empire, 90; and Black
Death, 90-91; and Aristotle, 96-97; myths
in, 343 (n. 75); and decline of knowledge, 343
(n. 78); and climatic changes, 344 (n. 89); and
Crusades, 344 (n. go)
European civilization: formation, io-i3,27-28,319
(n. 6), 320 (n. 21); early decline, 12-13
Fanon, Frantz, 168,183,298
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 404 (n. 6), 405
(n. 9)
Florida: slavery in, 141-42
Fort-Whiteman, Lovett, 216
Foster, William Z., 227
Fox-Genovese, Elizabeth, 341 (n. 48)
Franklin, Benjamin, 336 (n. 7), 339 (n. 26); racial
consciousness of, 77
Froude, James, 36-38,248
Fugitive Slave Law, 337 (n. 30)
Gallacher, Willie, 261
Garvey, Marcus, 213-24 passim, 254-55,256,261,
270-71,334 (n. 21,385 (nn. 103,104,105); on
Lenin, 386 (n. 123)
Gayle, Addison, z93-94,374 (nn. 6,8, 9)
Genoa: merchant colonies in Portugal, 103-4;
and English monarchy, 104-5; merchants in
Spain, 106; role of merchants in Columbus
expeditions, 108-9; rise of, 350 (n. 30); bankers
in Spain, 351 (nn. 51,55)
Genovese, Eugene, 168,176,341(n. 481,367
(n. 273), 369 (n. 1)
Germany, 253,297-98; nationalism in, 53-58
Gold Coast, 254-55
Grace, W. G., 266-67,398 (n. 148)
Greece, 268-69
Greek civilization: and Africa, 83-84
Grenada, 254-55
Guiana: slave revolts in, 160,366 (n. 244); and
marronage, 360 (n. 110)

Haiti, 274-78,310,311,363 (n. 160), 390 (n. 2);
slave society in, 144-49
Haitian Revolution, 146,147-49,363 (n. 176)
Hall, Otto, 215-16,218, 223-24
Harding, Vincent, 403 (n. 205)
Haywood, Harry, 216,zi7,218,2~3-24,295,396
(n. 114),403 (n. 205)
Hegel, G. W. F., 280-85; and Eurocentrism, 73-74,
335 (n. 5)
Hill, Robert, 215,385 (n. 105),398 (n. 142),400
(n. 1781,403 (n. 195)
Historiography: Black, 187-88,189-90,274,377
(n. 44); racialism in American, 18749,374
(n. n)
Hobsbawm, E. J., 31-32,325 (n. 8), 326 (nn. 12,zi)
Hook, Sidney, 373 (n. 2)
Huiswoud, Otto, 216, 221, 223
Hyndman, Henry, 258
Imperialism. See British imperialism; Colonialism
Indentured servants, 78-81,338 (n. 23), 339
(nn. 36,371
Independent Labour Party (Britain), 257-58,
258-60,261,271
India, 253,254-55,270
India Mutiny (1857), 391 (n. 21)
Indies: meaning in Middle Ages, 348 (n. 128)
Industrial Revolution, 30-31
Inikori, J. E., i n , 112-13,352 (n. 72)
International African Friends of Ethiopia, 271-72
International African Service Bureau, 273,274
International Brigade, 264, 272, 400 (n. 173)
International Trade Union Committee of Negro
Workers, 261,295
Ireland: conquest and colonization, 36-39, 41-42,
327 (n. 55); rebellions, 38-39; derationalization
of economy, 39; emigration, 340 (n. 39)
Irish: labor, 39-40, 259-60; peasants, 116
Isabel, Alonzo, 216
Islam: and science, 87; and medieval Europe,
87-89, 346 (n. 117); and slavery, 94-95; and
European racism, 346 (n. 117)
Italo-Ethiopian War, 261,271-74; and West Indies,
400 (n. 171)
Jamaica, 141,156-57, 310; and slave rebellions,
135-37,366 (nn. 246,249,265), 367 (n. 268); and
marronage, 160-64
James, C. L. R., 145,146-49,164-65,177.182,
183,184,188,261, 262, 287,288, 291,305,313,
314-6363 (n. 1771,365 (n. 232L 394 (n. 811, 399
(n. 165L 400 (n. 178),401 (n. l a ) , 403 (nn. 195,
202, 205); on British colonials, 250-51; origins
of social thinking, 251-52,393 (n. 59); early
political consciousness, 254-57; and Trotskyism, 265,398 (n. 142); on English literature, 266;
on connections between ancient Greece and
British Empire, 267-68; and Italo-Ethiopian
War, 271-72; and armed rebellion, 273-74; PanAfricanism, 278-79; on Athenian democracy,
380 (n. 60); on athleticism, 398 (n. 148); on

INDEX

433

Greeks, 399 (n. 153); on Stalinism, 402 (n. 192);
and Trotsky, 402 (n. 193)
James, George, 342 (nn. 62,631
Japan, 270
Jefferson, Thomas, 355 (n. 17)
Jews, 211-12,384 (n. 95)
Johnson-Forest Tendency, 279,280
Jones, Chris, 261
Jordan, Winthrop, 323 (n. 89), 336 (n. 6), 338
(n. 17)
Katayama, Sen, 221,223,224
Kenya, 254-55
Kenyatta, Jomo, 262,270,273,274,397 (nn. 123,127)
Kimbangu, Simon, 271
Ku Klw Klan, 376 (n. 27)
Labor. See Black labor; Slaves-labor
Las Casas, Bartolome de, 96-97,126-27
Law, Oliver, 295
League of Coloured People, 260,263
League of Struggle for Negro Rights, 295
Lenin, V I., 207-8, 209, 217, 223,224,226, 227, 234,
237,276,277-78,281-85,373 (n. 21,382 (n. 791,
403 (n. 201); on national question, 63; on Negro
Question, 219-21; on origins of socialism, 330
(n. 18); and American socialism, 387 (n. 128)
Lincoln, Abraham, 238
Louisiana, 149
L'Ouverture, Toussaint, 148,276-78,369 (n. 9)
Lukacs, Georg, 373 (n. 2)
Lynch, Hollis, 390 (n. I)
Lynching, 378 (n. 49)
Mackandel (maroon), 147,169
McKay, Claude, 215,221, 223, 264,394 (n. 77); and
British Intelligence, 397 (n. 136)
Makonnen, T. Ras, 260,262-63,270-71,400
(n. 169)
Marronage, 119-20,310-11; in Spanish colonies,
130-32; in Jamaica, 135-37,160-64; in Colombia, 137,360 (nn. 104,107); in Venezuela, 137-38;
in Guianas and Suriname, 138-39,360 (n. 110);
in North America, 142-43; in Haiti, 146-47
Martin, Tony, 215
Marx, Karl: on Irish Question, 40-43,329 (n. 72),
333 (n. 84); on the proletariat, 41-43,48; and
materialism, 51-52; on the state and capitalist
development, 57-61; on necessity of bourgeois
rule, 58-59; on capitalism as world system,
59-60; on nationalism, 60-61; on capitalism
and slave labor, 81-8z,iiz-i3,34i (n. 47); on
primitive accumulation, 121; on Irish immigration, 328 (n. 70); on social ideas, 329 (n. 82);
and German communists, 331 (n. 40); on German workers, 332 (n. 74); on bourgeoisie, 332
(n. 75), 333 (n. 78); on France and class development, 333 (n. 81)
-and Engels: on the proletariat, 41-43, 48;
write Communist Manifesto, 46-48; on petit
bourgeoisie, 48; as German nationalists, 52-53>

434

INDEX

55-57,60-61,332 ( n 53), 333 ( n 86); and Ferdinand Lassalle, 53-57; on national liberation
movements, 60-61; on capitalist wars, 120; on
nationalism, 224-26; on class struggle, 233-37;
as bourgeois ideologists, 330 (n. 18); role of, 402
(n. 187)
Marxism, 207-iz,zjz-40,~59-60, 287-88,313-16;
as Western construct, 1-2; and consciousness,
62; and culture, 62-63; and theories of revolution, 274-78; and working classes and imperialism, 372 (n. 32)
Merchants' and Planters' Contingent, 253-54,394
(n. 73)
Mexico, 129-30,209; aboriginal population of,
126; slavery in, 128,130-32
Miller, ~elly,'372(n. 22)
Milliard, Peter, 262
Mocambos. See Palenques
Moody, Harold, 260,263
Moore, Richard B., 215-16,217,218
Morgan, Edmund, 77,336 (n. 71,338 (n. 231,339
(n.25)
Mosley, Oswald, 264
Nasanov, N., 224
Nash, A. E. K., 340 (n. 46)
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), 197-98, 215,221
Nationalism: in Europe, 3; and Marxism, 62-65;
and racial myths, 324 (n. 108)
Nationalist movements, 254-55; for liberation,
270
Native Son, 293-99
Negro Commission (of Fourth Congress), 222-23
Nell, William C., 376 (n. 20)
New York, 141
Nkrumah, Kwame, 260,262,401 (n. 181)
Notes on Dialectics, 279-86
Nubia, 84,343 (n.67)
Nyerere, Julius, 183

Obeah, 136-37
Olivier, Sydney, 258
Opoba, Samuel, 262
Owen, Chandler, 214-15
Owens, Gordon, 216
Owens, Leslie H., 123-24,354 (n. 7)
Padmore, George, 164-65,182,184,249-74
passim, 287,288,305,313,315-16,394 (n. 811,
396 (n. w ) , 397 (n. 1 ~ 3400
) ~ (n. 169),401
(nn. 181,184)
Painter, Nell Irvin, 189
Palenques (quilombos, mocambos), i31-33,358
(n. 75)
Palmares, 133-35,136,359 (nn. 84,85,99)
Pan-Africanism, 249,254-55,260, 262-63,274,401
(nn. 181,184)
Panama, 131
Peasants: and revolution, 233-37
Pepper, John (Josef Pogany), 224

Peru, 129-30
Phillips, H. V., 216
Phillips, Ulrich B., 196
Piezas de Indias, iii,35i (n. 64)
Pirenne, Henri, 11,jzo (nn. 25,27), 321 (nn. 40,41)
Plantocracy, 374 (n. 5); in United States, 203; psychology of, 354 (n. 15)
Populism, 378 (n. 47)
Portugal: Atlantic explorations, io7-9,350 (n. 41);
state formation, 91-93,101-3; and national
identity, 92-93; and hostility toward Islam,
93-94; and English aristocracy, 102-3; voyages
of discovery in Africa and Asia, 105-6; rivalry
with Spain, 106; dominance of in sixteenth century slave trade, 111; formation of early bourgeoisie, 348 (n. 6); and British merchants, 349
(n. 9); Italian merchants in, 349 (n. 12)
Prester, John, 93,98-99,345 (nn. 95, llo), 346
(n. 116),349 (n. 17)
Proletariat: as class, 326 (n. 29); as revolutionary
class, 383 (n. 84)
Prosser, Gabriel, 149,170

Quilombos. See Palenques
Race: and domination, 26-28; origins of term, 324
(n. 126)
Racial capitalism, 3
Racialism: and American historiography, 354
(nn. 11, iz), 356 (n. 18); in Western civilization,
2, 66-68,76; in colonial America, 76-77; in
post-Civil War period, 188-89; as instrument of
capitalism, 204-5; and colonialism in Trinidad,
247; and Western radicalism, 307-8; and scientific thought, 338 (n. 20); and genocide, 338
(n. 21); intra-European, 339 (n. 37); and construction of the Negro, 340 (n. 46); as white
supremacy, 355 (n. 17); and American trade
union movement, 358 (n. 73); in British colonies, 392 (n. 26); in Ethiopian ruling class, 400
(n. 169)
Radek, Karl, 223, 259
Randolph, A. Phillip, 214-15, 403 (n. 196)
Rawick, George, 384 (n. 95)
Reed, John, 221
Reich, Wilhelm, 296
Resistance: and African culture, 123-24,153-55.
See also Slaves-rebellion
Reynolds, Reginald, 261
Robeson, Paul, 397 (n. w ) , 400 (n. 178), 404
(n. 6)
Roman Empire: and Africa, 84-85
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 196-97
Rosenwald Conference, 196-99
Rout, Leslie, 111,129
Rudder, Josh, 252,393 (n. 59)
Russia, 209,231-32, 235-36,259
Russian Revolution, 403 (n. 204)
Saklatvala, Shapurji, 261
Sankey, Edward G., 262

San Lorenzo Cerralvo, 132
San Lorenzo de 10s Negros, 132
Second International, 64,zol,208-9,211,226-27,
231,281,282
Seme, P. K. I., 260
Senghor, Lamine, 270-71
Shachtman, Max, 279
Shaw, George Bernard, 258
Slavery: and Islam in Africa, 88-89; historiography of, 112, 352 (n. 72), 355 (n. 16); and invention
of the Negro, 119; and slave personality, 123;
resistance to, 123-24; in American historiography, 124-25; and genocide, 126-27; and military
occupations, 129-30; in Florida, 140-41; in
South Carolina, 140-42; in New York, 141; in
Virginia, 141-44; and the American rebellion,
143-44,362 (nn. 150,153,157); in the West
Indies, 155-64; and American democracy as
contradiction, 199-200; and capitalist world
system, zoo, 341 (n. 48); and consciousness, 237;
in post-abolition Trinidad, 243-46; and abolition, 311-12; and European workers, 336 (n. 7);
American rationalizations for, 337 (n. lo); and
American law, 340 (n. 46); in Iraq, 346 (n. 117);
Mediterranean transfer to Atlantic region, 351
(n. 56); fugitives from, 361 (n. 133); and brutality, 368 (nn. 2, 3)
Slaves: registry of, 158-60; origins of term, 322
(n. 56); European, 344 (n. 92); stereotypes
regarding, 354 (n. 7)
-labor: in Europe, 11-12; and notion of Negro,
81-82; and colonial trade, 110-11; and capitalist
development, 110-11,112-16; African origins of,
118-20; and American Indians, 125-26; in Spanish colonies, 128-30; and ladinos, 128-30,357
(n. 41); in Mediterranean, 321 (n. 55); and production costs, 356 (n. 20); and genocide of Indians, 356 (nn. 23,26,27,28), 357 (n. 37); African
replacement of Indian, 357 (nn. 34,40); and
decline of populations, 365 (n. 241)
-rebellions, ~0-31,274-78.3io-ii, 358 (nn. 67,
68); African and Indian collaborations in, 13032; in Brazil, 132-35.153-55; in Jamaica, 135-37,
366 (nn. 246,249,265), 367 (n. 268); in the
United States, 141-44,362 (n. 134);in Haiti,
144-49; in the West Indies, 155-64; in Barbados,
158-60; in Guiana, 160,366 (n. 244); and historiography, 161,361 (n. 132),366 (n. 254)
-trade: magnitude of, 111-12,352 (n. 76); and
mortality of slaves, 353 (n. 104); and mortality
of crews, 353 (n. 105)
Small, Richard, 251-52,256
Smith, Abbot E., 78-79,339 (n. 36)
Snowden, Frank, 342 (n. 60), 343 (n. 70)
Socialism: and Industrial Revolution, 30,325
(n. 3); origins of, 45-46,329 (n. 1); as negation
of feudalism, 46-49; and industrial proletariat,
49-50; theorists of, and the working classes,
51; and Blacks, zoz, 386 (n. 124);in America,
210-11; ethnic divisions in, 210-11; in Britain,
25740,395 (n. 106)

INDEX

435

Socialist Workers' Party, 279-85
Sorenson, Reginald, 261
South Africa, 165,253
South Carolina, 140-42,149
Spain: and Genoese merchants, 106; rivalry with
Portugal, 106; Atlantic explorations, 108-9; and
colonial labor, 125-26; Castile and Aragon and
slavery, 128-29; and system of slave control,
130
Spanish Civil War, 272,397 (n. 134)
Spanish colonialism: and labor breeding, 356
(n. 18)
Stalin, Joseph, 217,223,226-27; on national question, 63
Stalinism, 279-85
Stokes, Rose Pastor, 221-22
Streator, George, 380 (nn. 58,62), 382 (n. 77)
Suriname, 138-40,310, 360 (nn. 113,122)
Taney, Roger, 340 (n. 46)
Tawney, R. H.: on capitalism, 322 (n. 59)
Thackeray, William Makepeace, 266
Third International (COMINTERN), 209-10,
261,z81-85,288; and American Communism,
211-12; and Negro Question, 218-28,292-93
Thomas, Jacob, 248-49,287,393 (nn. 53,541
Thompson, E. P., zg-30,32,35,39-40,140, 267,
325 (n. z), 361 (nn. 125,130)
Thorne, J. Albert, 217
Trade unionism: in Britain, 257-60,269-70
Trevor-Roper, Hugh, 336 (n. 6), 344 (n. 90)
Trinidad, 285; abolition of slavery and labor
problems in, 243-44; immigrant labor in,
244-45; East Indians in, 244-45,391 (n. 251,
392 (nn. 34,35); and Black radical tradition,
245-46; withdrawal of labor from plantations
in, 245-46; and French Creoles, 245-48,392
(n. 38); and resistance, 246; racialism and
British colonialism in, 247; and Colored middle
classes, 247-48; and Black middle class, 249-51,
393 (nn. 56,57); social origins of labor, 391
(nn. 12,13,15, 16)
Trinidad Workingmen's Association, 252,254
Trotsky, Leon, 177, 207-8,~17,~23,234,~79,403
(n. 203); on national question, 63
Trotskyism, 280-84, 295,398 (n. 142);American,
274,279
Trotter, William Monroe, 195,378 (n. 52), 379
(n. 53)
Turner, Henry A., 216-17
Turner, Nat, 168,170

(UNIA), 213-27 passim, 254-55,385 (nn. 102,
103,106)
Uruguay, 129-30
Valiente, Juan, 129-30
Venezuela, 129-30,132,~7-38,140-41
Verlinden, Charles, io3,ioq, 107,321 (n. 55), 322
(n. 564, 350 (n. 41)
Vesey, Denmark, 149
Vincent, Theodore, 215, 384 (n. 99)
Virginia, 141,149
Wallace-Johnson, I. T. A,, 270
Wallas, Graham, 258
Wallerstein, Immanuel, iol-2,104,344 (n. 89),
348 (n. 61,350 (n. 281,357 (n. 341,361 (n. 124);
on bourgeoisie and nationalism, 323 (n. 84)
Ward, Arnold, 261
Washington, Booker T., 193-94,214,377 (nn. 43,
451,378 (nn. 4652)
Webb, Beatrice, 285
Webb, Sidney, 285
West African Students Union, 260
West Indies: labor immigration to United States,
212-U; economy and World War I, 253-54.394
(nn. 74,75); unrest in, 272,273; economic
decline in nineteenth century, 365 (n. 218);
militant movements in after World War I, 394
(n. 78); immigration to United States, 396
(n. 109)
Williams, Eric, 152,155-56, 182, 262, 267, 273, 274,
313,315-16
Williams, George W., 190,192,287,376 (n. 20)
Williams, Henry Sylvester, 249, 260, 262, 393
(n. 56)
Woodson, Carter G., 192
World War I, 253-54; and Black soldiers, 393
(n. 711,394 (nn. 72,73,77)
Wright, Richard, 182-83,184,313,315-16,372
(n. 29); vilification of, 289; social origins of
thought, 289,404 (n. 1); intellectual roots, 29091; on Black radicalism, 291-92; and American
Communism, 292-97,302-5; on Marxism,
294-305 passim, 407 (n. 73); on working-class
consciousness, 297-99; on Black consciousness,
299-300,301-2; surveillance and harassment of,
404 (n. 6), 406 (nn. 7,8,9)
Wynter, Sylvia, 266,398 (n. 148)
Xhosas' Hundred Years War, 165,367 (n. 281)
Yates, James, 396 (n. 114)

Union of Students of African Descent, 260
Universal Negro Improvement Association

436

INDEX

Zinoviev, Grigory, 209,223

