18
The Palestine Liberation
Organization

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

Nigel Parsons

The evolving role of the PLO
The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) has evolved as it has endured, shifting over five
decades from anti-colonial radicalism to enervating diplomatic pursuit of the nationalist agenda.
That the organization has persisted for so long is a measure of both its durability and of
frustration.
The PLO was established in 1964 in Jerusalem on the initiative of the League of Arab States,
prompted by Egyptian president Gamal Abdul Nasser. It was intended as a mechanism for the
aggregation and articulation of a Palestinian political voice, subject to Arab tutelage. But by the
late 1960s, with a new leadership typified by the charismatic guerrilla leader Yasser Arafat, the
PLO had assumed the role with which it is more commonly associated: an independent means
of determining the direction of a Palestinian national project. The organization’s record judged
by its mandate is something of a curate’s egg. On the one hand, the PLO can claim credit for
reconstructing modern Palestinian national identity and securing recognition of the right to
self-determination in international law. On the other hand, it is responsible for the Declaration
of Principles, concluded with Israel in 1993, whereupon the bulk of personnel and resources
were transferred to the troubled semi-autonomy of the Palestinian Authority (PA).
The twenty-first century found the remnant PLO far from its peak, operating adjacent to
the PA but still performing important functions within the polity. In lieu of the conversion of
semi-autonomy into sovereignty, the organization retained authority over negotiations and
pursued wider Palestinian diplomacy. It continued to provide representation for the Palestinian
people as a nation, bridging the Occupied Territories and the diaspora; and it maintained a substantial network of diplomatic missions, increasingly afforded embassy status, around the world.

PLO institutions
The Charter and Basic Law
The original PLO Charter adopted in 1964 was subject to major amendment in 1968, following the entry of independent guerrilla groups into the organization. Besides lending the PLO a
209

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

Nigel Parsons

more independent and national character, from this point forth, of thirty-three articles, seven
made some reference to ‘arms’, ‘armed struggle’, ‘armed Palestinian revolution’ or ‘armed popular revolution’. Guerrillas were logically central to the project. For example, article XXX
asserted that ‘Fighters and carriers of arms in the war of liberation are the nucleus of the popular
army which will be the protective force for the gains of the Palestinian Arab people’ (Hartley
2006: 383–7). However, by 1993, compliance with the Israel–PLO letters of mutual recognition framing the Oslo process necessitated textual emendation, and the PLO’s senior decisionmaking body, the Palestine National Council (PNC), met twice to that effect. In 1996, the
twenty-first PNC convened in Gaza and comfortably reached the two-thirds majority required
to amend the contested articles. However, provisions for the drafting of a new charter were not
utilized. Under Israeli and international diplomatic pressure, the twenty-second PNC convened, again in Gaza, during December 1998, this time in the presence of US President Bill
Clinton. The PNC affirmed that a specific list of contentious articles had indeed been abrogated (Parsons 2005: 52, 186). Further to the PLO Charter, a rather less controversial Basic
Law determines internal procedure, including means of election to PLO bodies and the
frequency with which those bodies are to convene and reconstitute (Musallam 1990).

Constituent factions
Following the entry of guerrilla groups into the PLO in 1968, the organization became an
umbrella for multiple factions with contrasting views and patrons. Eight are represented on the
organization’s Executive Committee (EC). The Fatah movement, officially unveiled in 1965
but on the move from the late 1950s, constitutes the nationalist mainstream, currently led by
Mahmoud Abbas. Providing leftist opposition and helping frame national debate are the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and a related faction to which it gave rise in
1969 (as the Popular Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine until 1974), the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP). The DFLP itself gave rise to a splinter
group during 1990–91, the Palestine Democratic Union (known by its reverse Arabic acronym
FIDA), ostensibly in a dispute over participation in the post-Gulf War Madrid conference.
FIDA is closely allied to Fatah and the PA. The former Palestinian Communist Party joined the
PLO in 1987; the end of the Cold War saw it rename itself as the Palestinian People’s Party
(PPP) from 1991. The PPP was unique among PLO factions in that it emerged in the Occupied Territories rather than the diaspora. The Arab Liberation Front (ALF) was established in
1969 and represented the interests of the Iraqi Ba‘ath Party. During the al-Aqsa Intifada, the
ALF gained a measure of grassroots appreciation for distributing funds from Baghdad to families
of Palestinian martyrs. ALF chief Rakad Salim was arrested by Israel for his efforts in 2002. The
Palestine Liberation Front (PLF) is another offshoot of the PFLP (via an offshoot of that, the
PFLP-General Command); the PLF was established in 1977, also under Iraqi auspices, and is
perhaps best known for the public relations fiasco of the Achille Lauro operation in 1985 and an
assault on a Tel Aviv beach that brought the US–PLO dialogue to a halt in 1990. PLF history
is informed by schism and uneven participation in the PLO EC. Finally, the Palestinian Popular Struggle Front (PPSF) emerged in 1967, also from PFLP orbit (Sayigh 1997: xlii); it has a
negligible following in the West Bank and Gaza.
Outside of the EC, but with the minimum two seats reserved on the intermediary Central
Council (CC), are four additional factions. The Palestinian Arab Liberation Front and Islamic
Jihad retain two seats each, allocated to named individuals. Two further factions have seats
reserved but do not assume them. The first is the PFLP-GC, which broke away from the PFLP
in 1968 and has been very closely allied with Damascus. The second is the Vanguards of
210

The Palestine Liberation Organization

Popular Liberation War Organization, better known as al-Sa‘iqa (Thunderbolt); backed by
Syria, it was at one point a major military presence in the PLO. However, bitter fallout following the Israeli invasion of Lebanon left Sa‘iqa confronting the mainstream PLO, and terminal
decline set in. Both the PFLP-GC and Sa‘iqa are diaspora-era relics with little relevance to the
Occupied Territories.
Besides the Islamist opposition, two factions outside the PLO framework are of historic
note. In 1974, encouraged by Iraqi intelligence, Fatah dissident Sabri al-Banna, better known
as Abu Nidal, established his own radical faction (akin to a cult), the Fatah Revolutionary
Council. He was expelled from the PLO and sentenced to death in absentia for plotting the
assassination of his former Fatah colleague Mahmoud Abbas (Seale 1992: 98). The other nonPLO, non-Islamist faction of historical import was Fatah al-Intifada, established in 1983 with
Syrian support by the rebel commander Sa‘id Musa Maragha.

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

Chairman and secretary general
The founding PLO EC chairman was the lawyer and diplomat Ahmad Shuqayri. Incumbent
from 1964 to late 1967, Shuqayri was removed in the aftermath of the calamitous Six Day War.
He was replaced on a caretaker basis by a figure sympathetic to the guerrilla cause, Yahya
Hammuda, who held the reins through 1968. Then, on 3 February 1969, Arafat became the
third chairman, and by far the most famous. Upon his death in November 2004, Arafat was
succeeded by the then PLO secretary general, Mahmoud Abbas. The current secretary general
is Yasser Abed Rabbo, formerly of the FIDA faction until 2002, and closely associated with
Fatah. In the PA elections of 2006, Abed Rabbo lined up alongside Prime Minister Fayyad on
the Third Way list.

The Palestine National Council
The Palestine National Council (PNC) constitutes the supreme PLO decision-making body;
the rough equivalent of a national parliament for a dispersed refugee people, it remains the ultimate source of authority on decisions of national import within the Palestinian polity. The
inaugural session convened in Jerusalem in 1964 with 422 members (Sayigh 1997: 97). Reflecting the PLO’s peripatetic trajectory, the PNC has congregated in four different Arab capitals –
Cairo, Damascus, Algiers and Amman – in addition to Gaza in 1966, and three decades later in
1996 and again in 1998 (Parsons 2005: 323). The Hamas takeover of 2007 rendered the coastal
strip a problematic venue and so a subsequent PNC special session convened in August 2009
took place in Ramallah. The meeting of some 300 PNC members followed swiftly on the
heels of the sixth Fatah General Conference in Bethlehem, part of a concerted effort to boost
the legitimacy of nationalist institutions. Hamas dismissed the meeting as ‘a desperate attempt
to return [the] soul to a dead body’ (Xinhua 2009). Nevertheless, negotiations on national
unity have routinely addressed the incorporation of Hamas into the PNC, although the terms
on which this might happen remain in dispute. Negotiations in Tunis in late 1992 reportedly
saw Fatah offer Hamas ‘eighteen guaranteed seats in the PNC (compared to Fatah’s 33 and the
PFLP’s fifteen)’ (Mishal and Sela 2000: 98). During follow-up talks in Khartoum in 1993,
Hamas allegedly claimed 40 per cent of PNC seats, a concession firmly rejected, along with
other demands, by Arafat (ibid.: 99). More recently, article 2 of the 2006 National Reconciliation Document (commonly known as the Prisoners’ Document), negotiated by representatives
of Fatah, Hamas, Islamic Jihad, the PFLP and the DFLP, called for a new PNC constituted ‘in
a manner that secures the representation of all Palestinian national and Islamic forces, factions
211

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

Nigel Parsons

and parties and all sectors of our people’. Reflective of ongoing negotiation, the 2007
Mecca Agreement that brokered the PA’s short-lived national unity government called for
moving ahead with ‘measures to activate and reform the Palestine Liberation Organisation
and accelerate the work of the preparatory committee based on the Cairo and Damascus
Understandings’.
Besides political factions, the formula determining PNC composition reflects a corporatist
vision, with representatives drawn from various functional, as well as geographic, units of the
Palestinian polity. The components include military forces (historically, the Palestine Liberation Army, reorganized from 1983 as the Palestine National Liberation Army), mass organizations (unions), and representatives of communities worldwide, with a specific allowance for
refugee camp and Bedouin representatives (Musallam 1990: 12–13, 30–32). PNC members are
to be elected or nominated by committee, subject to circumstance. Following election in 1996
of the PA’s parliament, the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC), the eighty-eight PLC members plus 100 of the nearest runners up were to be added to the roll (Parsons 2005: 186). In
the pre-Oslo era, the historic guerrilla leader could usually rely on the heft of the PNLA within
the PNC to support his position (ibid.: 130). The post-election incorporation of PA PLC
members, consistent with bylaws of the PNC, performed a similar function when it came to
amending the Charter.

The Central Council
The Central Council (CC) was not an original component of the PLO but was added by the
eleventh PNC in 1973. Diplomatic success and the unwieldy nature of the PNC were felt to
necessitate an intermediary body (Musallam 1990: 18–21). CC members are drawn from the
PNC and include all members of the EC, plus members of the PNC secretariat, the military
committee, mass organizations, standing committees, political factions and a number of independents, as well as a batch of legislators from the PLC. Historically, the CC ratified conclusion
of the Declaration of Principles plus the establishment, in October 1993, of the PA via the
‘Phased Plan’ from the twelfth PNC (Parsons 2005: 125).

The Executive Committee
The EC constitutes a sort of coalition cabinet with members typically afforded a portfolio akin
to a government ministry. It is deemed to be ‘in permanent session and its members work on a
full-time basis’. In principle, the EC ‘and its members are responsible to the PNC individually
and collectively for the execution and implementation of the policies, plans and programs
drawn up and adopted by the PNC’ (Musallam 1990: 22). The EC has expanded over time to
reach eighteen members, drawn, in accord with the Basic Law, from the PNC. There are several constituent factions of varying import. The revamped PNC of 2009 saw Fatah maintain its
allocation of three official seats, with senior Fatah members holding another two seats as independents (certain other independents remained reliable Fatah allies); each of the other factions
held a single seat, the smaller among them as observers. One seat is reserved for the head of the
Palestine National Fund (PNF), with the remainder held by other independents. The EC is
responsible for selecting the chairman from among its number; in practice, this is the head of
Fatah. The PNC special session convened in August 2009 broke new ground: nominated
replacements for four (now deceased) factional representatives were approved by the PNC in
the usual way, but two independents were elected by free vote. Hanan Ashrawi narrowly
secured one of the seats and, in so doing, became the first woman elevated to the EC.
212

The Palestine Liberation Organization

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

Table 18.1 The PLO Executive Committee following the special session of 2009
Name

Affiliation

Portfolio

Mahmoud Abbas

Fatah

Yasser Abed Rabbo
Faruq al-Qaddumi
Sa’eb Erekata
Abd al-Rahim Malluh
Taysir Khalid
Hanna Amiraa
Salih Ra’fata
Ahmad Majdalania
Mahmoud Isma‘il
Ali Ishaq
Muhammad
Zuhdi al-Nashashibi
Ghassan al-Shak‘a
Zakariyya al-Agha
Riyad al-Khudari
As‘ad Abd al-Rahman
Ahmad Qureia
Hanan Ashrawia
Jamil Shihadaa
Wasil Abu Yusufa
Salam Fayyada

Independent
Fatah
Fatah
PFLP
DFLP
PPP
FIDA
PPSF
ALF
Ex-PLF/Independent
Independent

Chairman
Supervisor of the Political Dept
Secretary General
Member only
Negotiations Affairs Dept
Arab Relations Dept
Ex-patriot Affairs
Social Affairs Dept
Military and Security Dept
Planning Centre
Popular Organizations Dept
Youth and Sports Dept
Palestine National Fund

Independent
Independent (Fatah)
Independent
Independent
Independent (Fatah, elected)
Independent (elected)
Palestinian Arab Front
PLF
Independent

Dept. of International Relations
Refugees’ Affairs
Education and Higher Education Dept.
Research Dept.
Jerusalem Affairs Dept.
Dept. of Culture and Media
Observer
Observer
Economics Dept. (acting head), observer

Source: Based on a report in Al Ayyam, 28 August 2009, conversation with staff at the Palestine Media Center, and an
interview with EC member Dr Wasil Abu Yusuf, Ramallah, July 2011.
Note: a Indicates new members.

Participation in the EC is prone to fluctuation. For instance, controversy accompanying the
PLO’s initial and implicit recognition of Israel in 1974 famously led to the formation of the
Rejection Front, composed of the PFLP, the PFLP-GC, the ALF and the PPSF. Members suspended participation in the EC. Fallout from the invasion of Lebanon precipitated further dramatic internal fissures and finally left Sa‘iqa utterly marginalized by the mid-1980s (Gresh
1988: 184–7, 238–44). Oslo amplified the trend in the 1990s: disoriented by a diplomatic process in which they had not participated and for which they were not prepared, the PFLP, the
DFLP, the ALF, the PPP, and on occasion the Fatah dissident Faruq al-Qaddumi, could all
boycott the EC. So might leading independents. The passage of time took a further toll on an
aging membership, to the point that a somewhat diminished EC typically offered little resistance to the dictates of its long-serving and charismatic chairman. However, the Abbas era
marked a modest revival in EC fortunes: the troubles besetting the PA as a national project, and
the concomitant ascent of Hamas over Gaza, saw Abbas invest in the PLO leadership as a
source of additional legitimacy. The 2009 PNC meeting can be understood in this light.

The Palestine National Fund
The PNF is akin to the treasury of the PLO; based in Jordan, it also has an office in
Ramallah. The PNF is responsible for funding PLO departments, including diplomatic missions,
213

Nigel Parsons

although sympathetic host governments routinely contribute to the upkeep of Palestinian posts
overseas. PNF coffers historically drew upon a ‘liberation tax’ extracted from Palestinians in the
diaspora. The era of the PA found tax returns much diminished but still collected, especially in
Egypt and the Gulf. PLO employees contribute around 3 per cent of their salaries. The PLO
once held a celebrated investment portfolio; the Palestine Martyrs’ Society Workshops (SAMID)
generated substantial employment and income (Sayigh 1997: 460), although the Oslo process
saw it reduced to a modest archive in Abu Dis. The PLO may technically be in charge of the PA,
but the influx of donor funding to the Occupied Territories found the PA at least partially
responsible for funding its parent organization.

The PLO’s historic contribution

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

Reconstructing national identity
The PLO may not have realized Palestinian statehood, but it has done much to build the conceptual foundations upon which statehood might stand. Not least has been the reconstitution
of modern Palestinian national identity. The 1948 catastrophe, commemorated as al-Nakba, left
Palestine’s largely peasant society dislocated, fragmented and deeply vulnerable. The PLO’s
achievement would be to rally this critical human resource around the concept of armed struggle; the transformation from refugees to a guerrilla-led nation with self-respect and a clear sense
of purpose was not a foregone conclusion (Sayigh 1979; 1997: vii). Moreover, this psychological, cultural and social transformation continues to underpin the remarkable capacity of Palestinian society to resist Israeli occupation.
The PLO at its inception has been described in Patrick Seale’s irresistible phrase as ‘a sort of
corral in which Palestinians could charge about harmlessly letting off steam’ (Seale 1988: 121).
The organization established a conventional military in the Palestine Liberation Army, but for
the most part it remained a state-sponsored forum for venting frustration; Palestinians were
enjoined to wait for Arab states to liberate and reintegrate Palestine into the Arab fold. But,
independent of the PLO, two main activist currents were coalescing. From southern Palestine
to Gaza, via Cairo to the Gulf, Arafat and his colleagues were forging the nationalist Fatah
movement. From northern Palestine to Lebanon, and specifically at the American University
of Beirut, Christian Palestinians George Habash and Wadi Haddad, with Arab and Muslim colleagues, were building the Arab Nationalists Movement, the group that would develop and
bifurcate to form the principal left-wing opposition to Fatah within the PLO. Both currents
were committed to armed struggle, but, whereas Fatah held to an essentially non-doctrinaire
nationalism, the leftist factions adopted Marxist–Leninist platforms and an avowed hostility to
the Arab status quo. Fatah commenced a modest armed struggle under the title al-Asifa (the
Storm); it was no great success, but 1 January 1965 would soon be commemorated as the birth
of the Palestinian revolution.
Trounced by Israel in June 1967, discredited Arab regimes were ill-placed to support the
incumbent PLO leadership around Ahmad Shuqayri. Momentum behind the independent
guerrillas then increased tremendously in March 1968. Responding to Palestinian raids on the
newly occupied West Bank, a large column of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) crossed the
Jordan, intent on destroying a base at Karama. The IDF met uncommonly stiff resistance and
suffered major casualties, mostly at the hands of the Jordanian army. A courageous guerrilla
contribution was militarily marginal, and yet it proved politically seismic. The myth of guerrilla
triumph spread rapidly, ‘because it met critical human needs amongst the Palestinians’ (Terrill
2001: 91). Karama restored self-respect; guerrillas offered hope amid gloom and were duly
214

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

The Palestine Liberation Organization

propelled to the forefront of popular consciousness. Recruits presented in numbers; oil-rich
patrons from the Gulf offered financial support in return for legitimacy. Momentum was such
that confident guerrillas entered the PLO at the fourth PNC in July 1968. By the close of the
fifth PNC, Fatah alone had secured thirty-three of the 105 seats, rendering it the major bloc.
The PLO’s guerrilla leadership now commanded an array of assets: a bureaucracy, a military in
the Palestine Liberation Army, guerrilla units in the Popular Liberation Forces, diplomatic
representation and financial resources (Sharabi 1970: 32–3).
Psychological and institutional progress was substantial, but the course of armed struggle ran
far from smoothly. Post-occupation rebellion in the Occupied Territories was quickly suppressed by Israel. Then, discomfited and finally affronted by guerrilla activity on the East Bank,
the Hashemite regime launched a bloody purge from September 1970 to July 1971; the events
would be recalled by Palestinians as Black September. The PLO then decamped to Lebanon,
drawing on a combination of weak domestic state apparatus and receptive refugee constituency.
The 1969 Cairo Accords guaranteed PLO autonomy over the camps and operational freedom to
confront Israel. Headquartered in the Fakhani quarter of Beirut, secure in the ‘Fatahland’ of
southern Lebanon, the PLO would, in conventional terms, reach its military apogee through the
mid-1970s and early 1980s.

Securing recognition and the right to self-determination
The practical impossibility of defeating Zionism through military means necessitated a diplomatic strategy that would translate socio-psychological and institutional progress into regional
and international legal success. This unfolded unevenly, with landmarks in 1974, 1988 and 1993.
The goal of Arab nationalist liberation gave way to a discrete ‘democratic state’ of Palestine
between 1969 and the eighth PNC in 1971 (Gresh 1988: 9, 17–57). But this aspiration too
would erode under pressure of events on several levels. In the Palestinian polity, the gravitational pull of the Occupied Territories – where the post-1967 priority lay with ending the
occupation – counselled further compromise; the Palestine National Front, based in the territories, declared allegiance to the PLO in 1973 and gained admittance to the EC. In the region,
calamity in Jordan urged caution in future relations with neighbouring regimes. The strictly
national goals of Egypt and Syria in the 1973 war with Israel checked ambition again. In the
international arena, the USA proved an elusive interlocutor: US Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger precluded the possibility of negotiation with the PLO from 1975 onwards, until it
accepted UN Security Council resolutions 242 and 338 and Israel’s right to exist. The 1979
Camp David accords then conceived of no role for the PLO. But this was a bipolar world, and
pragmatic advice from the USSR maintained the lure of diplomatic initiative. The conceptual
bridge to diplomacy emerged in the radical idea of an interim ‘national authority’, put forward
in 1972 by the PDFLP with Fatah’s encouragement. The twelfth PNC in June 1974 then produced the ten-point ‘Phased Political Program’, point 2 of which called for a ‘people’s national,
independent and fighting authority on every part of Palestinian land that is liberated’ (Gresh
1988: 168). The USSR then invited the organization to establish an official mission in
Moscow. The following month the Arab summit in Rabat accorded the PLO the status of ‘sole
legitimate representative’ of the Palestinian people (ibid.: 179). In November, Arafat was
invited to address the UN General Assembly, whose Resolution 3236 defined Palestinian
rights as including ‘(a) The right to self-determination without external interference; (b) The
right to national independence and sovereignty’. Resolution 3237 invited the PLO ‘to participate in the sessions and work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer’. The majority in the Occupied Territories approved and in 1976 would vote in municipal elections for
215

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

Nigel Parsons

pro-PLO candidates (ibid.: 186). Tentative contacts were even forged eventually with the
United States: a ten-month cross-factional ceasefire on Israel’s northern border from July 1981
constituted an operational achievement for Fatah and accrued appreciation in Washington
(Cobban 1984: 112). The situation was deemed intolerable by Israel’s right-wing Likud
government; an assassination attempt against Israel’s ambassador to London by the non-PLO
Abu Nidal group served to trigger the invasion of Lebanon in July 1982. The demolition of
the PLO was intended to expedite an Israeli diktat in the Occupied Territories (Sayigh 1997:
507–8).
The PLO relocated to Tunis and cast about for ways to remain relevant. Redemption came
with the First Intifada in late 1987, driven by a confident local leadership, often from refugee
backgrounds and educated through PLO scholarships. Local leaders organized the secularnationalist Unified National Leadership of the Uprising (UNLU), composed of representatives
from Fatah, the PFLP, the DFLP and the communists (Robinson 1997: 19–37, 97). The manifest nationalism of the First Intifada prompted Jordan finally to concede its claim on the West
Bank in 1988. The PLO looked to fill the gap with the resolutions of the nineteenth PNC in
November. The Declaration of Independence of the State of Palestine drew upon UN General
Assembly Resolution 181, the original partition resolution from 1947 that endorsed the idea of
an Arab state alongside Israel. Denied a visa for the United States, Arafat then addressed a special meeting of the General Assembly in Geneva. He eventually foreswore recourse to terrorism and accepted, subject to PLO interpretation, UN resolutions 242 and 338. The PLO
Charter was disavowed, and Israel was finally explicitly acknowledged under US pressure at a
post-meeting press conference (Sayigh 1997: 624).
However, converting diplomatic momentum into institutional form would take six more
years. The PLO’s regional standing reached a low ebb following an ambivalent if misrepresented stance on the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. It played well with domestic constituents but
alienated patrons in the Gulf. The post-liberation destruction of the Palestinian community in
Kuwait, a key source of tax revenue for the PNF, added to the turmoil in Palestinian finances.
The crisis was such that salaries could not be paid to portions of the PNLA (Parsons 2005:
128–9). Alienation from Arab sponsors and the USA then helped keep the organization out of
postwar negotiations in Madrid and Washington. For Tunis, already wary of UNLU autonomy
and fearful of an ascendant Hamas, the spectre of alternative leadership loomed. Thus it was
that Israel chose a propitious moment to engage with the PLO. For the organization, the
Declaration of Principles secured Israeli recognition as the legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people, conditional on an end to armed resistance.

The PLO adjacent to the Palestinian Authority
Co-option
The Oslo process allowed the State of Israel to incorporate the bulk of PLO personnel,
resources and energy into restructured governance arrangements for the indigenous population
of the Occupied Territories. The PA presented a new array of institutional opportunities for
employment and the extension of patronage. Funding poured in from previously unlikely
sources, including the European Union, the United States, the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank. PLO cadres merged with local staff from the IDF’s bureaucratic wing in
the territories (the Civil Administration) and technocrats from NGOs and the private sector.
Duly embedded in governing structures and variously well resourced, the mainstream PLO
leadership might deem the PA an essential, if disappointing, national project. Their disposition
216

The Palestine Liberation Organization

speaks to Lyons’s observation that, given the right sort of incentive, ‘actors may become trapped
in a politics of moderation’ wherein the benefits of perpetuating the status quo outweigh the
costs of renewed confrontation (Lyons 2009: 101). Put another way, the PLO leadership
through Oslo have ‘invested too much for too long, and their power depends too heavily on
the process to accommodate a swift and radical shift’ (ICG 2010: i). However, Oslo-era and
post-Oslo negotiations such as the Annapolis process have steadfastly failed to produce an agreement that meets the basic terms of the PLO’s mandate or the reasonable expectations of ordinary
constituents. This means most obviously the right to self-determination and, in consequence,
key items on the nationalist agenda, among them sovereignty, borders, settlements, water,
Jerusalem and refugees. Herein is found scope for the continuing role of the PLO.

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

Negotiations and diplomacy
The PLO’s right to negotiate derives from its status as the ‘sole legitimate representative’ of the
Palestinian people accorded by the Arab League since 1974, with representative status affirmed
by the UN the same year. Israel eventually recognized the PLO in 1993 in the letters of mutual
recognition exchanged between Arafat, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Norwegian
Foreign Minister Holst. Rabin’s letter to Arafat declared:
In response to your letter of September 9, 1993, I wish to confirm to you that in light of
the PLO commitments included in your letter, the Government of Israel has decided to
recognize the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian people and commence negotiations with the PLO within the Middle East peace process.
(Parsons 2005: 90)
The Islamist position was clarified somewhat in the National Reconciliation Document of 2006,
which affirmed that Hamas and Islamic Jihad acknowledged the PLO’s role. Article 7 read:
Administration of the negotiations falls within the jurisdiction of the PLO and the President of the PNA, which will be on the basis of adhering to Palestinian national goals as
mentioned in this document on condition that any agreement must be presented to the
new PNC for ratification or a general referendum to be held in the homeland and the
Diaspora.
The massive leak of confidential PLO documents, made public by Al Jazeera and The Guardian
during January 2011, led Hamas publicly to revoke the PLO’s authorization to negotiate,
although the impact remained unclear.
The PLO pursued bilateral negotiations with Israel throughout the Oslo process, the postOslo revival mechanism of the Road Map (managed by the Quartet of the USA, the EU, the
UN and Russia) and the Annapolis process. The last of these ground to a halt amid the carnage
of Operation Cast Lead launched in late 2008. But lack of progress, in conjunction with relentless settlement-building by Israel in the West Bank, stimulated a search for alternative strategies
that might be pursued in parallel with the PA’s state-building programme under Salam Fayyad.
The shift in nationalist thinking was captured in the platform that emerged from Fatah’s sixth
General Conference; this required a halt to settlement construction as a precondition to further
negotiation, in addition to clear terms of reference and a resumption of talks at the point they
had previously concluded. The impact on the PLO’s position quickly became evident. It
affected the approach to negotiation and wider diplomacy. The altered approach to negotiations
constituted a paradigm shift, effectively a reversal of the early 1990s turn from Washington to
217

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

Nigel Parsons

Oslo. Whereas the delegation to Washington had stuck resolutely to principle, Oslo largely suspended principle in favour of progress on select, practical detail. It expedited the PA but offered
no resolution to key items from the nationalist agenda. The organization now looked ‘to turn
the paradigm [back] on its head . . . seeking to enshrine principles first, and from there, work
backwards to fill in the details’ (ICG 2010: 15). Israel balked, and bilateral negotiations stalled.
In conjunction, a prospective shift in diplomatic strategy sought the international community
rather than Israel as key interlocutor. The UN in particular held promise, and certainly offered a
more favourable playing field than anything cultivated by the United States.
The strategy reached a landmark of sorts on 23 September 2011, when PLO Chairman
Mahmoud Abbas requested that Palestine be granted full membership of the UN. The application was received in person by Secretary General Ban Ki-moon before proceeding to a committee of the Security Council. The USA worked tirelessly to subvert the initiative and
threatened ultimate use of the veto. The Palestinians retained the option of an appeal to the
General Assembly, which had the authority to upgrade the Permanent Observer Mission of
Palestine to the status of non-member state. The upgrade held practical implications for Palestinian diplomacy, including membership rights in UN agencies such as UNICEF, UNESCO
and the WHO, as well as the prospect of access to the International Criminal Court and the
International Court of Justice. Platforms such as these could lend Palestine a degree of leverage
with Israel that had previously been lacking.

Palestinian foreign policy
The formation of what might be termed Palestinian foreign policy is not a simple business; notwithstanding the importance of Fatah, it is in effect arrived at through a four-way competition
between the PA President’s Office, the PLO’s Negotiation Affairs Department and its related
Negotiations Office, the PA Prime Minister’s Office and the PA Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Bilateral relations with major states such as the USA, and any state party to negotiations, fall
under the purview of the President’s Office. Negotiations per se are the business of the Negotiation Affairs Department. The Prime Minister’s Office can also contribute, to the extent that its
policies are compatible with those of the presidency. The role of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs is primarily to market the policies thus formulated. Indeed, foreign ministers visiting
Ramallah may opt to call directly on the president.
Before Oslo, Palestinian foreign policy was the business of the PLO’s Political Department
under its long-standing head Faruq al-Qaddumi. But after the Declaration of Principles the
office waned for two reasons: location outside the Occupied Territories made it difficult to
coordinate with foreign envoys coming to the PA; and Qaddumi himself remained a stalwart
opponent of Oslo. The decline of the Political Department allowed influence to accrue to the
PA’s Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation, transformed during 2003 into the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The role of the Political Department then effectively ended in
2005 as the PA passed the Palestinian Diplomatic Law and the PLO CC mandated the minister
to manage embassies and consulates. The achievement owed something to the forceful personality of then minister, Nasser al-Qudwa.

The Negotiations Support Unit
The PLO established the Negotiation Affairs Department in Gaza in 1994 to help expedite the
Israel–PLO Interim Agreement. The Negotiation Affairs Department was led by Abbas until
his appointment as prime minister of the PA in 2003, whereupon Sa’eb Erekat took charge.
218

The Palestine Liberation Organization

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

The need to prepare for complex final-status negotiations led the department to the UK government in search of support in 1998. The upshot was formation of the Negotiations Support
Unit in Ramallah, under the guidance of Adam Smith International. Besides the UK, funding
was received from Scandinavia and the Netherlands. Adam Smith International’s role ended
in 2010. The unit was mandated to provide legal, policy and communications advice to the
Palestinian side in negotiations. Up until 2011, it was best known for maintaining a high quality website. But that changed when it emerged as the key source of the controversial leak
to Al Jazeera. Not part of the classic PLO structure, the Negotiations Support Unit had
already provoked controversy for its influence, its reliance on Palestinian-American and other
Western-trained diaspora Palestinian lawyers and the substantial salaries paid to its most senior
managers. Scandal hastened the demise of the contested unit; when it was dissolved in March
2011, staff were laid off, particularly Palestinians with Israeli citizenship. The affair did not
reflect well on the Negotiation Affairs Department chief, Erekat, but he was maintained in
office by Abbas.

Diplomatic representation
Besides the headline work of negotiation and strategic diplomacy, the PLO shares with the PA
in a substantial network of diplomatic offices attending to the routine business of the Palestinian nation worldwide. The Arab League and Non-Aligned Movement accord PLO offices
the status of embassies of Palestine, as do former Eastern bloc states. Proactive PLO diplomacy
looked to upgrade that status where possible, with a flurry of activity taking place in Europe
and the Americas. Brazil afforded the PLO an embassy in late 2010, to be followed by
several neighbours during early 2011. On a symbolic level, the PLO General Delegation to
Washington, DC, was first allowed to fly the Palestinian flag at around the same time. In
Europe, Ireland followed three EU states plus Norway to accord the PLO office the title of
Mission of Palestine, under an ambassador. Further upgrades were anticipated as renewed PLO
diplomacy gathered pace.
Major embassies are located in Arab League states, determined by politics and the size of
Palestinian community on the ground. Embassies in Egypt and Jordan employ perhaps forty
diplomats and administrators. Concentrations of refugees in Lebanon and Syria necessitate a
major presence, as do Palestinian communities in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf. Despite severe
cutbacks, the PLO continues to take some responsibility for non-UNRWA education in the
diaspora, and, in the field of health care, the Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) operates
as best it can. However, the steep decline in PLO services in the diaspora left a vacuum that, in
Lebanon at least, could be partially filled by radical Islamist offshoots (Robinson 2010). Fatah
al-Islam at the Nahr al-Barid camp was a case in point.
Outside the Arab world, important posts are maintained in Indonesia, as the world’s most
populous Muslim state; in South Africa, where the ANC government identifies with the struggle; and in Vietnam and China, fellow anti-colonial allies, with the Beijing embassy dating
from the earliest days of the PLO. Russia has of course constituted an important post of long
standing. Typical Western European missions are not so big and serve primarily as centres for
media and communication; they may have just three to five staff. The largest post in Latin
America is in Chile, thought to be home to perhaps 100,000 citizens of Palestinian descent. In
North America, the PLO maintains the General Delegation in Washington, DC, plus the Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine to the UN in New York (designated ‘Palestine’ rather
than ‘PLO’ since 1988); it was led at the time of writing by Riyad Mansour of the DFLP. Both
posts have around half a dozen staff. There is a similar mission in Geneva.
219

Nigel Parsons

The Palestinian diplomatic service is estimated to employ between 350 and 400 personnel,
with PLO and PA staff and tasks tightly interwoven. During the tenure of the national unity
government, PLO staff hosted senior Hamas figures such as Mahmud al-Zahhar. Diplomatic
staff coordinate with host governments on mundane but critical capacity-building tasks such as
the supply and receipt of aid. Diplomatic posts also receive batches of Palestinian students for
professional development, particularly in fields appropriate to state-building such as engineering and education, although since Israel’s clampdown on Gaza these opportunities have been
increasingly restricted to Palestinians from the West Bank. Diplomatic personnel also work to
raise awareness of Palestinian issues, both within the host government and foreign embassies
and within local universities and civil society.

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

Conclusion
The early twenty-first century found the PLO far from the pomp of its heyday. The bulk of
Palestinian nationalist energy now infused the constrained semi-autonomy of the PA in the
West Bank and the encircled Hamas administration in Gaza. The PLO, a once vital forum for
interfactional debate and dissent, could increasingly seem a dated, even marginal, anti-colonial
relic. And yet the power against which the PLO defined itself had still to yield on the demand
for self-determination. Credit for securing that right and reconstructing the national identity
upon which it is based rests in large part with the venerable organization. It is in these circumstances, and adjacent to the PA, that the PLO might still be said to perform multiple key roles
within the Palestinian polity. It continues to contribute to the formation and implementation
of Palestinian policy. It provides a recognized address for interlocutors and (controversy notwithstanding) an enduring institutional capacity to negotiate. Diplomatic posts provide national
representation and a point of contact for Palestinians abroad, including the refugee heart of the
nation. As the PA endeavours to build the state on the ground, the PLO carries the case, with
some efficacy, to the international community. If a final-status agreement with Israel is ever
concluded, it is likely to be through the PLO, with the PNC convened for ratification.

References and further reading
Sections of this chapter draw on an earlier publication: Parsons, N. (2009) ‘The Palestine Liberation Organization and the Oslo Process: Incorporation without Accommodation’, in B. W. Dayton and
L. Kriesberg (eds), Conflict Transformation and Peacebuilding: Moving from Violence to Sustainable Peace
(London and New York: Routledge). The author would like to thank Yezid Sayigh for reading an
earlier version of this text.
Cobban, H. (1984) The Palestinian Liberation Organisation: People, Power, and Politics (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press).
Gresh, A. (1988) The PLO: The Struggle Within (London: Zed Press).
Hartley, C. (ed.) (2006) A Survey of Arab–Israeli Relations (3rd ed., London: Routledge).
ICG (International Crisis Group) (2010) Tipping Point? Palestinians and the Search for a New Strategy,
Middle East Report, 26 April; available at: www.crisisgroup.org/en/regions/middle-east-north-africa/
israel-palestine/095-tipping-point-palestinians-and-the-search-for-a-new-strategy.aspx.
Lyons, T. (2009) ‘Peacebuilding, Democratization, and Transforming the Institutions of War’, in B. W.
Dayton and L. Kriesberg (eds), Conflict Transformation and Peacebuilding: Moving from Violence to Sustainable Peace (London and New York: Routledge).
Mishal, S., and Sela, A. (2000) The Palestinian Hamas: Vision, Violence, and Coexistence (New York:
Columbia University Press).
Musallam, S. (1990) The Palestine Liberation Organization: Its Function and Structure (Brattleboro, VT:
Amana).
220

The Palestine Liberation Organization

© Peters, Joel; Newman, David, Mar 05, 2013, Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, ISBN: 9781136160691

Parsons, N. (2005) The Politics of the Palestinian Authority: From Oslo to al-Aqsa (London and New York:
Routledge).
Quigley, J. (2010) The Statehood of Palestine: International Law in the Middle East Conflict (Cambridge and
New York: Cambridge University Press).
Robinson, G. (1997) Building a Palestinian state: The Incomplete Revolution (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press).
Robinson, G. (2010) ‘Palestine Liberation Organization’, in The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World,
Oxford Islamic Studies Online, www.oxfordislamicstudies.com/article/opr/t236/e0618.
Sayigh, R. (1979) Palestinians: From Peasants to Revolutionaries (London: Zed Press).
Sayigh, Y. (1997) Armed Struggle and the Search for State: The Palestinian National Movement, 1949–1993
(Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Seale, P. (1988) Asad of Syria: The Struggle for the Middle East (London: I. B. Tauris).
Seale, P. (1992) Abu Nidal: The World’s Most Notorious Terrorist (London: Arrow).
Sharabi, H. (1970) Palestine Guerrillas: Their Credibility and Effectiveness (Beirut: Institute for Palestine
Studies).
Terrill, W. A. (2001) ‘The Political Mythology of the Battle of Karameh’, Middle East Journal, 55/1,
pp. 91–11.

221

