Democratic Confederalism
Abdullah Öcalan

2011

Contents
I. Preface

3

II. The Nation-State
A. Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1. Nation-state and Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. The State and its Religious Roots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Bureaucracy and the Nation-State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4. Nation-State and Homogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5. Nation-State and Society . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B. Ideological Foundations of the Nation-State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1. Nationalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Positivist Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Sexism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4. Religiousness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C. The Kurds and the Nation-State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4
4
4
5
5
6
6
6
7
7
7
8
8

III. Democratic Confederalism
A. Participation and the Diversity of the Political Landscape . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B. The Heritage of the Society and the Accumulation of Historical Knowledge . . . .
C. Ethics and Political Awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D. Democratic Confederalism and a Democratic Political System . . . . . . . . . . . .
E. Democratic Confederalism and Self-Defence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F. Democratic Confederalism Versus Strife for Hegemony . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
G. Democratic Confederate Structures at a Global scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
H. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9
9
9
10
10
11
12
12
12

IV. Principles of Democratic Confederalism

14

V. Problems of the Peoples in the Middle East and Possible Ways to a Solution

15

2

I. Preface
For more than thirty years the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) has been struggling for the
legitimate rights of the Kurdish people. Our struggle, our fight for liberation turned the Kurdish
question into an international issue which affected the entire Middle East and brought a solution
of the Kurdish question within reach. When the PKK was formed in the 1970s the international
ideological and political climate was characterized by the bipolar world of the Cold War and the
conflict between the socialist and the capitalist camps. The PKK was inspired at that time by
the rise of decolonialization movements all over the world. In this context we tried to find our
own way in agreement with the particular situation in our homeland. The PKK never regarded
the Kurdish question as a mere problem of ethnicity or nationhood. Rather, we believed, it was
the project of liberating the society and democratizing it. These aims increasingly determined
our actions since the 1990s. We also recognized a causal link between the Kurdish question and
the global domination of the modern capitalist system. Without questioning and challenging
this link a solution would not be possible. Otherwise we would only become involved in new
dependencies. So far, with a view to issues of ethnicity and nationhood like the Kurdish question,
which have their roots deep in history and at the foundations of society, there seemed to be
only one viable. solution: the creation of a nation-state, which was the paradigm of the capitalist
modernity at that time. We did not believe, however, that any ready-made political blueprints
would be able to sustainably improve the situation of the people in the Middle East. Had it not
been nationalism and nation-states which had created so many problems in the Middle East? Let
us therefore take a closer look at the historical background of this paradigm and see whether we
can map a solution that avoids the trap of nationalism and fits the situation of the Middle East
better.

3

II. The Nation-State
A. Basics
With the sedentarization of people they began to form an idea of the area that they were
living in, its extension and its boundaries, which were mostly determined by nature and features
of the landscape. Clans and tribes that had settled in a certain area and lived there for a long
period of time developed the notions of a common identity and of the homeland. The boundaries
between what the tribes saw as their homelands were not yet borders. Commerce, culture or language were not restricted by the boundaries. Territorial borders remained flexible for a long time.
Feudal structures prevailed almost everywhere and now and then dynastic monarchies or great
multi-ethnic empires rose with continuously changing borders and many different languages
and religious communities like the Roman Empire, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Ottoman
Empire or the British Empire. They survived long periods of time and many political changes
because their feudal basis enabled them to distribute power flexibly over a wide range of smaller
secondary power centres.

1. Nation-state and Power
With the appearance of the nation-state trade, commerce and finance pushed for political
participation and subsequently added their power to the traditional state structures. The development of the nation-state at the beginning of the Industrial Revolution more than two hundred
years ago went hand in hand with the unregulated accumulation of capital on the one hand and
the unhindered exploitation of the fast growing population on the other hand. The new bourgeoisie which rose from this revolution wanted to take part in the political decisions and state
structures. Capitalism, their new economic system, thus became an inherent component of the
new nation-state. The nation-state needed the bourgeoisie and the power of the capital in order
to replace the old feudal order and its ideology which rested on tribal structures and inherited
rights by a new national ideology which united all tribes and clans under the roof of the nation.
In this way, capitalism and nation-state became so closely linked to each other that neither could
be imagined to exist without the other. As a consequence of this, exploitation was not only sanctioned by the state but even encouraged and facilitated. But above all the nation-state must be
thought as the maximum form of power. None of the other types of state have such a capacity of
power. One of the main reasons for this is that the upper part of the middle-class has been linked
to the process of monopolization in an ever-more increasing manner. The nationstate itself is the
most developed complete monopoly. It is the most developed unity of monopolies such as trade,
industrial, finance and power. One should also think of ideological monopoly as an indivisible
part of the power monopoly.

4

2. The State and its Religious Roots
The religious roots of the state have already been discussed in detail (A. Ocalan, The Roots of
Civilisation, London, 2007). Many contemporary political concepts and notions have their origin
in religious or theological concepts or structures. In fact, a closer look reveals that religion and
divine imagination brought about the first social identities in history. They formed the ideological
glue of many tribes and other pre-state communities and defined their existence as communities.
Later, after state structures had already developed, the traditional links between state, power
and society began to weaken. The sacred and divine ideas and practices which had been present
at the origin of the community increasingly lost their meaning for the common identity and
were, instead, transferred onto power structures like monarchs or dictators. The state and its
power were derived from divine will and law and its ruler became king by the grace of God.
They represented divine power on earth.
Today, most modern states call themselves secular, claiming that the old bonds between religion and state have been severed and that religion is no longer a part of the state. This is arguably
only half the truth. Even if religious institutions or representatives of the clergy do no longer participate in political and social decision-making they still do influence these decisions to an extent
just as they are influenced themselves by political or social ideas and developments. Therefore,
secularism, or laicism as it is called in Turkey, still contains religious elements. The separation of
state and religion is the result of a political decision. It did not come naturally. This is why even
today power and state seem to be something given, god-given we might even say. Notions like
secular state or secular power remain ambiguous. The nation-state has also allocated a number
of attributes which serve to replace older religiously rooted attributes like: nation, fatherland,
national flag, national anthem, and many others. Particularly notions like the unity of state and
nation serve to transcend the material political structures and are, as such, reminiscent of the
pre-state unity with God. They have been put in the place of the divine
When in former times a tribe subjugated another tribe its members had to worship the gods
of the victors. We may arguably call this process a process of colonization, even assimilation. The
nation-state is a centralized state with quasi-divine attributes that has completely disarmed the
society and monopolizes the use of force.

3. Bureaucracy and the Nation-State
Since the nation-state transcends its material basis, the citizens, it assumes an existence beyond its political institutions. It needs additional institutions of its own to protect its ideological
basis as well as legal, economic and religious structures. The resulting ever-expanding civil and
military bureaucracy is expensive and serves only the preservation of the transcendent state itself, which in turn elevates the bureaucracy above the people. During the European modernity
the state had all means at its disposal to expand its bureaucracy into all strata of the society.
There it grew like cancer infecting all lifelines of the society. Bureaucracy and nation-state cannot exist without each other. If the nation-state is the backbone of the capitalist modernity it
certainly is the cage of the natural society. Its bureaucracy secures the smooth functioning of
the system, secures the basis of the production of goods, and secures the profits for the relevant
economic actors in both the real-socialist and the business-friendly nation-state. The nation-state
domesticates the society in the name of capitalism and alienates the community from its natural
5

foundations. Any analysis meant to localize and solve social problems needs to take a close look
at these links

4. Nation-State and Homogeneity
The nation-state in its original form aimed at the monopolization of all social processes. Diversity and plurality had to be fought, an approach that led into assimilation and genocide. It
does not only exploit the ideas and the labour potential of the society and colonize the heads of
the people in the name of capitalism. It also assimilates all kinds of spiritual and intellectual ideas
and cultures in order to preserve its own existence. It aims at creating a single national culture,
a single national identity, and a single unified religious community. Thus it also enforces a homogeneous citizenship. The notion of citizen has been created as a result of the quest for such a
homogeneity. The citizenship of modernity defines nothing but the transition made from private
slavery to state slavery. Capitalism can not attain profit in the absence of such modern slave
armies. The homogenic national society is the most artificial society to have ever been created
and is the result of the “social engineering project”. These goals are generally accomplished by
the use of force or by financial incentives and have often resulted in the physical annihilation of
minorities, cultures, or languages or in forced assimilation. The history of the last two centuries
is full of examples illustrating the violent attempts at creating a nation that corresponds to the
imaginary reality of a true nation-state.

5. Nation-State and Society
It is often said that the nation-state is concerned with the fate of the common people. This
is not true. Rather, it is the national governor of the worldwide capitalist system, a vassal of the
capitalist modernity which is more deeply entangled in the dominant structures of the capital
than we usually tend to assume: It is a colony of the capital. Regardless how nationalist the
nationstate may present itself, it serves to the same extent the capitalist processes of exploitation.
There is no other explanation for the horrible redistribution wars of the capitalist modernity.
Thus the nation-state is not with the common people – it is an enemy of the peoples. Relations
between other nation-states and international monopolies are coordinated by the diplomats of
the nation-state. Without the recognition by other nation-states none of them could survive. The
reason can be found in the logic of the worldwide capitalist system. Nation-states which leave
the phalanx of the capitalist system will be overtaken by the same fate that the Saddam regime
in Iraq experienced or it will be brought to its knees by means of economic embargoes. Let us
now derive some characteristics of the nation-state from the example of the Republic of Turkey.

B. Ideological Foundations of the Nation-State
In the past the history of states was often equated with the history of their rulers, which lent
them almost divine qualities. This practice changed with the rise of the nation-state. Now the
entire state was idealized and elevated to a divine level.

6

1. Nationalism
Assuming that we would compare the nation-state to a living god then nationalism would
be the correspondent religion. In spite of some seemingly positive elements, nation-state and
nationalism show metaphysical characteristics. In this context, capitalist profit and the accumulation of capital appear as categories shrouded in mystery. There is a network of contradictory
relations behind these terms that is based on force and exploitation. Their hegemonic strive for
power serves the maximization of profits. In this sense, nationalism appears as a quasi-religious
justification. Its true mission, however, is its service to the virtually divine nation-state and its
ideological vision which pervades all areas of the society. Arts, science, and social awareness:
none of them is independent. A true intellectual enlightenment therefore needs a fundamental
analysis of these elements of modernity.

2. Positivist Science
The paradigm of a positivist or descriptive science forms another ideological pillar of the
nation-state. It fuels nationalist ideology but also laicism which has taken the form of a new religion. On the other hand it is one of the ideological foundations of modernity and its dogmata
have influenced the social sciences sustainably. Positivism can be circumscribed as a philosophical approach that is strictly confined to the appearance of things, which it equates with reality
itself. Since in positivism appearance is reality, nothing that has no appearance can be part of
reality. We know from quantum physics, astronomy, some fields of biology and even the gist
of thought itself that reality occurs in worlds that are beyond observable events. The truth, in
the relationship between the observed and the observer, has mystified itself to the extent that
it no longer fits any physical scale or definition. Positivism denies this and thus, to an extent,
resembles the idol worshipping of ancient times, where the idol constitutes the image of reality.

3. Sexism
Another ideological pillar of the nation-state is the sexism that pervades the entire society.
Many civilized systems have employed sexism in order to preserve their own power. They enforced women’s exploitation and used them as a valuable reservoir of cheap labour. Women are
also regarded as a valuable resource in so far as they produce offspring and provide the reproduction of men. Thus, woman is both a sexual object and a commodity. She is a tool for the
preservation of male power and can at best advance to become an accessory of the patriarchal
male society. On the one hand, the sexism of the society of the nation-state strengthens the power
of the men; on the other hand the nationstate turns its society into a colony by the exploitation
of women. In this respect women can also be regarded as an exploited nation. In the course of
the history of civilization the patriarchy consolidated the traditional framework of hierarchies,
which in the nation-state is fuelled by sexism. Socially rooted sexism is just like nationalism an
ideological product of the nation-state and of power. Socially rooted sexism is not less dangerous
than capitalism. The patriarchy, however, tries to hide these facts at any rate. This is understandable with a view to the fact that all power relations and state ideologies are fuelled by sexist
concepts and behaviour. Without the repression of the women the repression of the entire society is not conceivable. The sexism within the nation-state society while on the one hand gives
the male the maximum power on the other hand turns the society through the woman into the
7

worst colony of all. Hence woman is the historical-society’s colony nation which has reached
its worst position within the nation-state. All the power and state ideologies stem from sexist
attitudes and behaviour. Woman’s slavery is the most profound and disguised social area where
all types of slavery, oppression and colonization are realized. Capitalism and nation-state act in
full awareness of this. Without woman’s slavery none of the other types of slavery can exist
let alone develop. Capitalism and nation-state denote the most institutionalized dominant male.
More boldly and openly spoken: capitalism and nation-state are the monopolism of the despotic
and exploitative male.

4. Religiousness
Even if it acts seemingly like a secular state, the nation-state does not shy away from using a
mélange of nationalism and religion for its purposes. The reason is simple: religion still plays an
important part in some societies or parts of them. In particular Islam is very agile in this respect.
However, religion in the age of modernity does no longer play its traditional role. Whether it is
a radical of a moderate belief, religion in the nation-state does no longer have a mission in the
society. It can only do what it is permitted by the nation-state. Its still existing influence and its
functionality, which can be mis-used for the promotion of nationalism, are interesting aspects
for the nation-state. In some cases religion even takes on the part of nationalism. The Shi’ah of
Iran is one of the most powerful ideological weapons of the Iranian state. In Turkey the Sunni
ideology plays a similar but more limited part.

C. The Kurds and the Nation-State
After the preceding short introduction into the nation-state and its ideological basics we will
now see why the foundation of a separate Kurdish nation-state does not make sense for the Kurds.
Over the last decades the Kurds have not only struggled against repression by the dominant
powers and for the recognition of their existence but also for the liberation of their society from
the grip of feudalism. Hence it does not make sense to replace the old chains by new ones or
even enhance the repression. This is what the foundation of a nation-state would mean in the
context of the capitalist modernity. Without opposition against the capitalist modernity there
will be no place for the liberation of the peoples. This is why the founding of a Kurdish nationstate is not an option for me. The call for a separate nation-state results from the interests of
the ruling class or the interests of the bourgeoisie but does not reflect the interests of the people
since another state would only be the creation of additional injustice and would curtail the right
to freedom even more. The solution to the Kurdish question, therefore, needs to be found in an
approach that weakens the capitalist modernity or pushes it back. There are historical reasons,
social peculiarities and actual developments as well as the fact that the settlement area of the
Kurds extends over the territories of four different countries which make a democratic solution
indispensable. Furthermore, there is also the important fact that the entire Middle East suffers
from a democracy deficit. Thanks to the geostrategic situation of the Kurdish settlement area
successful Kurdish democratic projects promise to advance the democratization of the Middle
East in general. Let us call this democratic project democratic confederalism.

8

III. Democratic Confederalism
This kind of rule or administration can be called a non-state political administration or a
democracy without a state. Democratic decision-making processes must not be confused with the
processes known from public administration. States only administrate while democracies govern.
States are founded on power; democracies are based on collective consensus. Office in the state
is determined by decree, even though it may be in part legitimized by elections. Democracies use
direct elections. The state uses coercion as a legitimate means. Democracies rest on voluntary
participation. Democratic confederalism is open towards other political groups and factions. It
is flexible, multi-cultural, anti-monopolistic, and consensus-oriented. Ecology and feminism are
central pillars. In the frame of this kind of self-administration an alternative economy will become
necessary, which increases the resources of the society instead of exploiting them and thus does
justice to the manifold needs of the society

A. Participation and the Diversity of the Political Landscape
The contradictory composition of the society necessitates political groups with both vertical
and horizontal formations. Central, regional and local groups need to be balanced in this way.
Only they, each for itself, are able to deal with its special concrete situation and develop appropriate solutions for far-reaching social problems. It is a natural right to express one’s cultural,
ethnic, or national identity with the help of political associations. However, this right needs an
ethical and political society. Whether nationstate, republic, or democracy – democratic confederalism is open for compromises concerning state or governmental traditions. It allows for equal
coexistence

B. The Heritage of the Society and the Accumulation of Historical
Knowledge
Then again, democratic confederalism rests on the historical experience of the society and its
collective heritage. It is not an arbitrary modern political system but, rather, accumulates history
and experience. It is the offspring of the life of the society. The state continuously orientates itself
towards centralism in order to pursue the interests of the power monopolies. Just the opposite
is true for confederalism. Not the monopolies but the society is at the centre of political focus.
The heterogeneous structure of the society is in contradiction to all forms of centralism. Distinct
centralism only results in social eruptions. Within living memory people have always formed
loose groups of clans, tribes or other communities with federal qualities. In this way they were
able to preserve their internal autonomy. Even the internal government of empires employed
diverse methods of self-administration for their different parts, which included religious authorities, tribal councils, kingdoms, and even republics. Hence it is important to understand, that even
9

centralist seeming empires follow a confederate organizational structure. The centralist model is
not an administrative model wanted by the society. Instead, it has its source in the preservation
of power of the monopolies.

C. Ethics and Political Awareness
The classification of the society in categories and terms after a certain pattern is produced
artificially by the capitalist monopolies. What counts in a society like that is not what you are
but what you appear to be. The putative alienation of the society from its own existence encourages the withdrawal from active participation, a reaction which is often called disenchantment
with politics. However, societies are essentially political and value-oriented. Economic, political,
ideological, and military monopolies are constructions which contradict the nature of society by
merely striving for the accumulation of surplus. They do not create values. Nor can a revolution
create a new society. It can only influence the ethical and political web of a society. Anything
else is at the discretion of the ethics-based political society. I mentioned already that the capitalist modernity enforces the centralization of the state. The political and military power centres
within the society have been deprived of their influence. The nation-state as a modern substitute of monarchy left a weakened and defenceless society behind. In this respect, legal order and
public peace only imply the class rule of the bourgeoisie. Power constitutes itself in the central
state and becomes one of the fundamental administrative paradigms of modernity. This puts the
nation-state in contrast to democracy and republicanism. Our project of “democratic modernity”
is meant as an alternative draft to modernity as we know it. It builds on democratic confederalism
as a fundamental political paradigm. Democratic modernity is the roof of an ethics-based political society. As long as we make the mistake to believe that societies need to be homogeneous
monolithic entities it will be difficult to understand confederalism. Modernity’s history is also a
history of four centuries of cultural and physical genocide in the name of an imaginary unitary
society. Democratic confederalism as a sociological category is the counterpart of this history
and it rests on the will to fight if necessary as well as on ethnic, cultural, and political diversity.
The crisis of the financial system is an inherent consequence of the capitalist nation-state. However, all efforts of the neoliberals to change the nation-state have remained unsuccessful. The
Middle East provides instructive examples.

D. Democratic Confederalism and a Democratic Political System
In contrast to a centralist and bureaucratic understanding of administration and exercise of
power confederalism poses a type of political self-administration where all groups of the society
and all cultural identities can express themselves in local meetings, general conventions and
councils. This understanding of democracy opens the political space to all strata of the society
and allows for the formation of different and diverse political groups. In this way it also advances
the political integration of the society as a whole. Politics becomes a part of everyday life. Without
politics the crisis of the state cannot be solved since the crisis is fuelled by a lack of representation
of the political society. Terms like federalism or self administration as they can be found in liberal
democracies need to be conceived anew. Essentially, they should not be conceived as hierarchical
levels of the administration of the nation-state but rather as central tools of social expression
10

and participation. This, in turn, will advance the politicization of the society. We do not need big
theories here, what we need is the will to lend expression to the social needs by strengthening the
autonomy of the social actors structurally and by creating the conditions for the organization of
the society as a whole. The creation of an operational level where all kinds of social and political
groups, religious communities, or intellectual tendencies can express themselves directly in all
local decision-making processes can also be called participative democracy. The stronger the
participation the more powerful is this kind of democracy. While the nation-state is in contrast
to democracy, and even denies it, democratic confederalism constitutes a continuous democratic
process.
The social actors, which are each for itself federative units, are the germ cells of participative
democracy. They can combine and associate into new groups and confederations according to the
situation. Each of the political units involved in participative democracy is essentially democratic.
In this way, what we call democracy then is the application of democratic processes of decisionmaking from the local level to the global level in the framework of a continuous political process.
This process will affect the structure of the social web of the society in contrast to the striving
for homogeneity of the nation-state, a construct that can only be realized by force thus bringing
about the loss of freedom.
I have already addressed the point that the local level is the level where the decisions are made.
However, the thinking leading to these decisions needs to be in line with global issues. We need
to become aware of the fact that even villages and urban neighbourhoods require confederate
structures. All areas of the society need to be given to self-administration, all levels of it need to
be free to participate.

E. Democratic Confederalism and Self-Defence
Essentially, the nation-state is a militarily structured entity. Nation-states are eventually the
products of all kinds of internal and external warfare. None of the existing nation-states has come
into existence all by itself. Invariably, they have a record of wars. This process is not limited to
their founding phase but, rather, it builds on the militarization of the entire society. The civil
leadership of the state is only an accessory of the military apparatus. Liberal democracies even
outdo this by painting their militaristic structures in democratic and liberal colours. However,
this does not keep them from seeking authoritarian solutions at the highpoint of a crisis caused
by the system itself. Fascist exercise of power is the nature of the nation-state. Fascism is the
purest form of the nation-state.
This militarization can only be pushed back with the help of self-defence. Societies without any mechanism of self-defence lose their identities, their capability of democratic decisionmaking, and their political nature. Therefore, the self-defence of a society is not limited to the
military dimension alone. It also presupposes the preservation of its identity, its own political
awareness, and a process of democratization. Only then can we talk about self-defence.
Against this background democratic confederalism can be called a system of self-defence of
the society. Only with the help of confederate networks can there be a basis to oppose the global
domination of the monopolies and nation-state militarism. Against the network of monopolies
we must build up an equally strong network of social confederacies.

11

This means in particular that the social paradigm of confederalism does not involve a military
monopoly for the armed forces, which do only have the task of ensuring the internal and external
security. They are under direct control of the democratic institutions. The society itself must be
able to determine their duties. One of their tasks will be the defence of the free will of the society
from internal and external interventions. The composition of the military leadership needs to
be determined in equal terms and parts by both the political institutions and the confederate
groupings.

F. Democratic Confederalism Versus Strife for Hegemony
In democratic confederalism there is no room for any kind of hegemony striving. This is particularly true in the field of ideology. Hegemony is a principle that is usually followed by the classic
type of civilization. Democratic civilizations reject hegemonic powers and ideologies. Any ways
of expression which cut across the boundaries of democratic self-administration would carry
self-administration and freedom of expression ad absurdum. The collective handling of matters
of the society needs understanding, respect of dissenting opinions and democratic ways of decisionmaking. This is in contrast to the understanding of leadership in the capitalist modernity
where arbitrary bureaucratic decisions of nation-state character are diametrically opposed to the
democratic-confederate leadership in line with ethic foundations. In democratic confederalism
leadership institutions do not need ideological legitimization. Hence, they need not strive for
hegemony

G. Democratic Confederate Structures at a Global scale
Although in democratic confederalism the focus is on the local level, organizing confederalism
globally is not excluded. Contrariwise, we need to put up a platform of national civil societies in
terms of a confederate assembly to oppose the United Nations as an association of nation-states
under the leadership of the superpowers. In this way we might get better decisions with a view
to peace, ecology, justice and productivity in the world.

H. Conclusion
Democratic confederalism can be described as a kind of selfadministration in contrast to the
administration by the nationstate. However, under certain circumstances peaceful coexistence is
possible as long as the nation-state does not interfere with central matters of self-administration.
All such interventions would call for the self-defence of the civil society.
Democratic confederalism is not at war with any nation-state but it will not stand idly by at
assimilation efforts. Revolutionary overthrow or the foundation of a new state does not create
sustainable change. In the long run, freedom and justice can only be accomplished within a
democratic-confederate dynamic process.
Neither total rejection nor complete recognition of the state is useful for the democratic efforts
of the civil society. The overcoming of the state, particularly the nation-state, is a long-term
process.

12

The state will be overcome when democratic confederalism has proved its problem-solving
capacities with a view to social issues. This does not mean, though, that attacks by nation-states
have to be accepted. Democratic confederations will sustain self-defence forces at all times. Democratic confederations will not be limited to organize themselves within a single particular territory. They will become cross-border confederations when the societies concerned so desire.

13

IV. Principles of Democratic Confederalism
1. The right of self-determination of the peoples includes the right to a state of their own.
However, the foundation of a state does not increase the freedom of a people. The system of
the United Nations that is based on nation-states has remained inefficient. Meanwhile, nationstates have become serious obstacles for any social development. Democratic confederalism is
the contrasting paradigm of the oppressed people.
2. Democratic confederalism is a non-state social paradigm. It is not controlled by a state. At
the same time, democratic confederalism is the cultural organizational blueprint of a democratic
nation.
3. Democratic confederalism is based on grass-roots participation. Its decision-making processes lie with the communities. Higher levels only serve the coordination and implementation
of the will of the communities that send their delegates to the general assemblies. For limited
space of time they are both mouthpiece and executive institutions. However, the basic power of
decision rests with the local grass-roots institutions.
4. In the Middle East, democracy cannot be imposed by the capitalist system and its imperial
powers which only damage democracy. The propagation of grass-roots democracy is elementary.
It is the only approach that can cope with diverse ethnical groups, religions, and class differences.
It also goes together well with the traditional confederate structure of the society
5. Democratic confederalism in Kurdistan is an anti-nationalist movement as well. It aims at
realizing the right of self-defence of the peoples by the advancement of democracy in all parts of
Kurdistan without questioning the existing political borders. Its goal is not the foundation of a
Kurdish nationstate. The movement intends to establish federal structures in Iran, Turkey, Syria,
and Iraq that are open for all Kurds and at the same time form an umbrella confederation for all
four parts of Kurdistan

14

V. Problems of the Peoples in the Middle East
and Possible Ways to a Solution
The national question is not a phantasm of the capitalist modernity. Nevertheless it was the
capitalist modernity which imposed the national question on the society. The nation replaced the
religious community. However, the transition to a national society needs the overcoming of the
capitalist modernity if the nation is not to remain the disguise of repressive monopolies.
As negative as is the over-emphasis of the national category in the Middle East as severe
would be the consequences of neglecting the collective national aspect. Hence the method in
handling the issue should not be ideological but scientific and not nationstatist but based on the
concept of democratic nation and democratic communalism. The contents of such an approach
are the fundamental elements of democratic modernity.
Over the past two centuries nationalism and tendency for nation-states have been fuelled in
the societies of the Middle East. The national issues have not been solved but rather have been
aggravated in all areas of the society. Instead of cultivating productive competition the capital
enforces internal and external wars in the name of the nation-state.
The theory of communalism would be an alternative to capitalism. In the framework of democratic nations which do not strive for power monopolies it may lead to peace in a region which
has only been the field of gory wars and genocides.
In this context we can speak of four majority nations: Arabs, Persians, Turks, and Kurds. I do
not wish to divide nations into majority or minority as I do not find this to be appropriate. But
due to demographic considerations I shall speak of majority nations. In the same context we may
also use the term minority nations.
1. There are more than twenty Arab nation-states which divide the Arab community and
damage their societies by wars. This is one of the main factors responsible for the alienation
of cultural values and the apparent hopelessness of the Arab national question. These nationstates have not even been able to form a cross-national economic community. They are the main
reason of the problematic situation of the Arab nation. A religiously motivated tribal nationalism
together with a sexist patriarchal society pervades all areas of the society resulting in distinct
conservatism and slavish obedience. Nobody believes that the Arabs will be able to find an Arab
national solution to their internal and crossnational problems. However, democratization and
a communalist approach might provide such a solution. Their weakness towards Israel, which
the Arab nation-states regard as a competitor, is not only the result of international support
by the hegemonic powers. Rather, it is the result of a strong internal democratic and communal
institutions within Israel. Over the last century, the society of the Arab nation has been weakened
by radical nationalism and Islamism. Yet, if they are able to unite communal socialism which they
are not a stranger to with that of the understanding of a democratic nation then they may be able
to find themselves a secure, long-term solution.

15

2. The Turks and Turkmens form another influential nation. They share a similar understandings of power and ideology with the Arabs. They are strict nation-statists and have a profound
religious and racial nationalism engraved in them. From a sociological point of view, the Turks
and Turkmens are quite different. The relations between Turkmen and Turkish aristocracy resemble the tensed relations between Bedouins and Arab aristocracy. They form a stratum whose
interests are compatible with democracy and communalism. The national problems are quite
complex. The power strive of the nation-state, distinct nationalism and a sexist patriarchal society prevail and create a very conservative society. The family is regarded as the smallest cell of
the state. Both individuals and institutions have taken in these aspects. Turkish and Turkmen
communities struggle for power. Other ethnic groups are subjected to a distinct policy of subjugation. The centralist power structures of the Turkish nation-state and the rigid official ideology
have prevented a solution to the Kurdish question until today. The society is made to believe
that there is no alternative to the state. There is no balance between the individual and the state.
Obedience is regarded as the greatest virtue
In contrast to this, the theory of the democratic modernity offers an adequate approach to
all national communities in Turkey to solve their national problems. Community based project
of a democratic Turkish confederation would both strengthen its internal unity and and create
the conditions for a peaceful coexistence with the neighbours that it lives with. Borders have
lost its former meaning when it comes to social unity. In spite of geographic boundaries today’s
modern communication tools allow for a virtual unity between individuals and communities
wherever they are. A democratic confederation of the Turkish national communities could be a
contribution to world peace and the system of democratic modernity.
3. The Kurdish national society is very complex. Worldwide, the Kurds are the biggest nation
without a state of their own. They have been settling in their present settlement areas since
the Neolithic. Agriculture and stock breeding as well as their readiness to defend themselves
using the geographic advantages of their mountainous homeland helped the Kurds to survive as
a native people. The Kurdish national question rises from the fact that they have been denied
their right to nationhood. Others tried to assimilate them, annihilate them, and in the end flatly
denied their existence. Not having a state of their own has advantages and disadvantages. The
excrescences of state-based civilizations have only been taken in to a limited extent. This can be
a benefit in the realization of alternative social concepts beyond the capitalist modernity. Their
settlement area is divided by the national borders of four countries and lies in a geo-strategically
important region, thus providing the Kurds a strategic advantage. The Kurds do not have the
chance to form a national society through the use of state-power. Although there is a Kurdish
political entity today in Iraqi-Kurdistan, it is not a nation-state but rather a parastatal entity.
Kurdistan had also been home to Armenian and Aramaic minorities before these fell victims
to genocides. There are also smaller groups of Arabs and Turks. Even today there are many
different religions and faiths living side by side there. There also rudiments of a clan and tribal
culture while there is almost no presence of urban culture there.
All these properties are a blessing for new democratic political formations. Communal cooperatives in farming but also in the water economy and the energy sector offer themselves as ideal
ways of production. The situation is also favourable for the development of an ethical political
society. Even the patriarchal ideology is less deeply rooted here than in the neighbouring societies. This is beneficial for the establishment of a democratic society where women’s freedom
and equality are to form one of the main pillars. It also offers the conditions for the creation of a
16

democratic environment-friendly nation in line with the paradigm of the democratic modernity.
The construction of a democratic nation based on multi-national identities is the ideal solution
when faced with the dead-end street nation-state. The emerging entity could become a blueprint
for the entire Middle East and expand dynamically into neighbouring countries. Convincing the
neighbouring nations of this model shall change the fate of the Middle East and shall reinforce
the chance of democratic modernity to create an alternative. In this sense, therefore, the freedom
of the Kurds and the democratization of their society would be synonymous with the freedom of
the whole region and its societies.
4. The reasons for today’s problems of the Persian or Iranian nation can be found in the interventions of historical civilizations and the capitalist modernity. Although their original identity
was a result of Zoroastrian and Mithraic tradition these have been annulled by a derivative of Islam. Manichaeism that emerged as the synthesis of Judaism, Christianity and Mohammedanism
with Greek philosophy was not able to prevail against the ideology of the official civilization.
Indeed, it went no further then to nurture the tradition of rebellion. It has hence converted the
Islamic tradition into Shi’ah denomination and adopted it to be its latest civilizational ideology.
Presently there are efforts made to modernize itself by passing the elements of capitalist modernity through its Shi’ah filter.
The Iranian society is multi-ethnic and multi-religious and blessed with a rich culture. All
national and religious identities of the Middle East can be found there. This diversity is in strong
contrast to the hegemonic claim of the theocracy, which cultivates a subtle religious nationalism
and the ruling class does not shrink back from anti-modernist propaganda whenever it serves
their interests. Revolutionary and democratic tendencies have been integrated by the traditional
civilization. A despotic regime skilfully governs the country. The negative effects of American
and European sanctions are not negligible here.
Despite strong centralist efforts in Iran, from the grass-roots already some kind of federalism
exists. When elements of democratic civilisation and federalist elements including Azeris, Kurds,
Baluchis, Arabs, and Turkmens intersect, the project of a “Democratic Confederation of Iran” can
emerge and become attractive. Women’s movement and communal traditions will play a special
role here
5. The Armenian national question contains one of the greatest tragedies that the progress
of the capitalist modernity has brought about in the Middle East. The Armenians are a very old
people. They shared much of their settlement area with the Kurds. While the Kurds live primarily on agriculture and animal husbandry the Armenians engaged in arts and crafts. Just like the
Kurds, the Armenians cultivated a tradition of self-defence. Apart from some short episodes the
Armenians never successfully founded a state. They rely on Christian culture which gives them
their identity and their faith in salvation. Because of their religion they often suffered repression
at the hands of the Muslim majority. Hence, the emerging nationalism bore fruit with the Armenian bourgeoisie. Soon there were differences with the Turkish nationalists eventually ending in
the genocide of the Armenians by the Turks.
Apart from the Jews the Armenians are the second-largest people which live primarily in
the Diaspora. The foundation of an Armenian state in the west of Azerbaijan, however, did not
solve the Armenian national question. The consequences of the genocide can hardly be put into
words. The search for the lost country defines their national psyche and is at the heart of the
Armenian question. The issue is aggravated by the fact that these areas have been settled by
other people since then. Any concepts based on a nation-state cannot offer a solution. There is
17

neither a homogenous population structure there nor any clear borders as is required by the
capitalist modernity. The thinking of their opponents may be fascist; however, it is not enough
to only bring the genocide to one’s mind. Confederate structures could be an alternative for the
Armenians. The foundation of a democratic Armenian nation in line with the paradigm of the
democratic modernity promises the Armenians an opportunity to reinvent themselves. It could
enable them to return to their place in the cultural plurality of the Middle East. In the event that
they renew themselves under the Armenian democratic nation not only shall they continue to
play their historical role within the Middle East culture but they shall also find the right path to
liberation.
6. In modern times the Christian Arameans (Assyrians) also suffered the fate of the Armenians. They too are one of the oldest people in the Middle East. They shared a settlement area
with the Kurds but also with other people. Like the Armenians they suffered from repression by
the Muslim majority paving the way for European-style nationalism among the Aramean bourgeoisie. Eventually the Arameans too fell victims to genocide at the hands of the Turks under
the leadership of the fascist Committee of Unity and Progress. The collaborationist Kurds lent
a helping hand in this genocide. The question of Aramean national society has its roots in the
civilization but has also developed further with Christianity and ideologies of modernity. For a
solution there is a need for a radical transformation of the Arameans. Their real salvation may be
to break away from the mentality of classical civilization and capitalist modernity and instead embrace democratic civilization and renew their rich cultural memory as an element of democratic
modernity in order to re-construct themselves as the “Aramean Democratic Nation”.
7. The history of the Jewish people also gives expression to the overall problematic cultural
history of the Middle East. The search for the backdrop of expulsion, pogroms and genocide
amounts to balancing the accounts of the civilizations. The Jew-ish community has taken up the
influences of the old Sumerian and Egyptian cultures as well as those of regional tribal cultures.
It has contributed a lot to the culture of the Middle East. Like the Arameans they fell victims
to extreme developments of modernity. Against this background, intellectuals of Jewish descent
developed a complex point of view towards these issues. However, this is by far not enough. For a
solution of the problems as they exist today a renewed appropriation of the history of the Middle
East is needed on a democratic basis. The Israeli nationstate is at war since its foundation. The
slogan is: an eye for an eye. Fire cannot be fought by fire, though. Even if Israel enjoys relative
security thanks to its international support, this is not a sustainable solution. Nothing will be
permanently safe as long as the capitalist modernity has not been overcome.
The Palestine conflict makes it clear that the nation-state paradigm is not helpful for a solution.
There has been much bloodshed; what remains is the difficult legacy of seemingly irresolvable
problems. The Israel-Palestine example shows the complete failure of the capitalist modernity
and the nation-state.
The Jews belong to the culture bearers of the Middle East. Denial of their right to existence
is an attack on the Middle East as such. Their transformation into a democratic nation just as
for Armenians and Arameans would make their participation in a democratic confederation of
the Middle East easier. The project of an “East-Aegean Democratic Confederation” would be a
positive start. Strict and exclusive national and religious identities may evolve into flexible and
open identities under this project. Israel may also evolve into a more acceptable open democratic
nation. Undoubtedly though its neighbours must also go through such a transformation.

18

Tensions and armed conflicts in the Middle East make a transformation of the paradigm of
modernity seem inevitable. Without it a solution of the difficult social problems and national
questions is impossible. Democratic modernity offers an alternative to the system that is unable
to resolve problems.
8. The annihilation of Hellenic culture in Anatolia is a loss that cannot be compensated. The
ethnic cleansing arranged by the Turkish and Greek nation-states in the first quarter of the last
century has left its mark. No state has the right to drive people from their ancestral cultural region.
Nevertheless, the nationstates showed their inhuman approach towards such issues again and
again. The attacks on the Hellenic, Jewish, Aramean and Armenian cultures were stepped up
while Islam spread throughout the Middle East. This, in turn, contributed to the decline of the
Middle-Eastern Civilization. The Islamic culture has never been able to fill the emerging void. In
the 19th century when the capitalist modernity advanced into the Middle East it found a cultural
desert created by self-inflicted cultural erosion. Cultural diversity also strengthens the defence
mechanism of a society. Monocultures are less robust. Hence, the conquest of the Middle East
had not been difficult. The project of a homogeneous nation as propagated by the nation-states
furthered their cultural decline.
9. The Caucasian ethnic groups also have social problems which are not insignificant. Again
and again they have migrated into the Middle East and stimulated its cultures. They have unquestionably contributed to its cultural wealth. The arrival of modernity almost made these minority
cultures disappear. They, too, would find their adequate place in a confederate structure.
Finally, let me state again that the fundamental problems of the Middle East are deeply rooted
in the class civilization. They have tightened with the global crisis of the capitalist modernity. This
modernity and its claim to dominance cannot offer any solutions not to mention a long-term
perspective for the Middle-East region. The future is democratic confederalism.
Writings by Abdullah Ocalan Prison Writings: The Roots of Civilisation, London, 2007 ISBN:
978–0745326160 Prison Writings: The PKK and the Kurdish Question in the 21st Century, London,
2011 ISBN: 978–0956751409 War and Peace in Kurdistan, Cologne, 2009, PDF www.freedom-forocalan.com The Road Map for Democratization of Turkey and Solution to the Kurdish Question
(Summary), Cologne, 2011, PDF www.freedom-for-ocalan.com

19

The Anarchist Library
Anti-Copyright

Abdullah Öcalan
Democratic Confederalism
2011
www.freedom-for-ocalan.com
The word “Qwam” plural “Aqwam” can mean “people”, “nation”, or “tribe” depending on the
context. The translator incorrectly translated, in reference to the kurdish people as a kurdish
“state” when in reality Ocalan rejects the notion of a state — originally published by:
Transmedia Publishing Ltd. – London, Cologne International Initiative Edition
theanarchistlibrary.org

Kurdish Communalism
Janet Biehl
Sep. 10 2011

During the past five years, the Kurds of southeastern Turkey have built communalist institutions on a scale unprecedented in the world. Earlier this year, in“Hasankeyf: A Story of Resistance,” I described the long-term Kurdish resistance to a massive hydroelectric dam project,
coordinated by 36-year-old Ercan Ayboga.
After the article was published, Ercan (pronounced AIR-john) wanted to reach out to communalists in other parts of the world, and make the Kurdish achievement in assembly democracy
known to them, so we agreed on an interview. We began our conversation the by e-mail. Then in
September, I visited Diyarbakir for the Mesopotamian Social Forum, and on a sunny day in Sumer
Park, we sat down and continued the interview. His calm determination and clear-headedness,
were impressive to me. So was the clear resolve of the Kurdish people to continue their fight for
“democratic autonomy,” even under conditions of persecution.
The war between the Turkish state and the PKK guerrillas, which began in 1984, continues
to this day. The Turkish state routinely demonizes Kurdish freedom activists as “terrorists” by
associating them with the PKK. Tragically, the press of Turkey’s NATO allies is silent, at best,
not only on the conflict but on the criminalization of Kurdish political activity. The silence, in my
view, must be broken, and the remarkable Kurdish achievement made known to the world.
—Ercan, what is your background? Where do you live, and what is your job?
—Around forty years ago my parents emigrated from Turkish Kurdistan to Germany because
of the bad economic situation in their homeland. So I grew up in Germany, but our connection
with Kurdistan never ceased, as we visited every two years. Let’s say that I have two “identities,”
which I regard as an opportunity to know well both a Western and an Eastern society. Since
age sixteen, I have been continuously politically active in different leftist German and Kurdish
organizations. The main two arenas for my engagement are the freedom struggle of the Kurdish
people, which started in the 1980s, and left organizations that oppose war, discrimination against
migrants, and the mistreatment of workers in both Germany and Turkey.
After completing my studies in civil engineering and hydrology, I worked for more than two
years in the municipality of the largest city of Turkish Kurdistan, called Diyarbakir (in Kurdish:
Amed). Between the fall of 2004 and the beginning of 2007, I was heavily involved in establishing
a campaign to oppose the large Ilisu Dam Project on the Tigris River, which would have grave
social, cultural, ecological, and political impacts on many, many people. Since 2007 I worked in
this campaign, called the Initiative to Keep Hasankeyf Alive, as international coordinator also

from Germany, but spent two to three months annually in Kurdistan. The Initiative has as its
objective, not only to see the cancellation of the Ilisu project, but to build up a coalition of damcritical and water-issue movements in the Republic of Turkey. At the same time I began a Ph.D.
on river restoration.
—Is Turkish Kurdistan a village society? How much is it industrialized?
—Kurdistan is no longer a classic village society. In the 1960s, the Turkish state introduced the
capitalist economy into Turkish Kurdistan, and an industrialization process like that of Europe
or North America is under way, albeit in smaller steps. But the feudal elements are still strong
in half of the provinces, and industrial capitalism is still less dominant in Kurdistan than in the
Western Turkish provinces.
Turkish territory doesn’t have much oil, but all the oil it does have lies in Kurdistan. The big
five hydroelectric power plants on the Euphrates River in Kurdistan produce an important part
of the country’s electricity. But the local population doesn’t benefit much economically.
The first agriculture in human history was developed here. Agriculture remains the main
source of income, as farmers till the soil in subsistence farming. But now Turkey’s greatest cotton
production also happens here, and most of the hard wheat (used for pasta) comes from Kurdistan.
Up to the 1990s, animal husbandry was a significant part of the economy, but the war between
the Turkish Army and the PKK (Kurdistan Workers Party) guerrillas destroyed most of it. While
Turkey once exported meat, for the past years it has imported meat.
The past twenty years have seen an enormous shift. In the armed conflict, the Turkish Army
destroyed 4,000 villages and forcibly displaced at least two million people. Today around half of
Turkey’s Kurds no longer live in Kurdistan. Because of the war, and for economic reasons, they
have moved to Istanbul and other cities. The Kurdish cities, like Diyarbakir, have grown fast (half
of the people live in cities now), and a large, impoverished lumpenproletariat has developed.
The eastern two-thirds of the mainly Kurdish-populated provinces are the poorest in the Republic of Turkey. Three provinces in western Turkish Kurdistan, where the freedom struggle is
not so strong and the wartime destruction was limited, are an exception.
According to recent statistics, Kurds constitute almost half of the Turkish working class. They
work mainly in the worst-paid sectors of the economy, like construction, restaurants, tourism,
and textile. They are not well organized as workers and are not strong in the big labor unions.
In recent years mining is on the rise in Turkish Kurdistan. Large international companies are
interested in chromium, coal, and gold. As the most territory is mountainous, intensive mining
exploitation would negatively affect both the population and nature.
—What effect has the mountainous terrain had historically?
—The mountains of Kurdistan—the Eastern Toros and the Northern Zagros, rainy, partly
forested—have historically shaped Kurds’ character, making them rebellious, robust, and
stubborn. Considering that the Kurds have never had their “own” strong state but instead have
arranged themselves within the dominant states of others (Turks, Arabs, Persians), we can say
that mountains are a principal reason why Kurdish culture has survived.
That is especially true in the twentieth century, when repression and efforts at assimilation
became systematic. Starting in the 1960s and 1970s, Kurds based in the mountains waged classic
guerrilla armed struggles against the Iraqi, Turkish and Iranian states (in the smallest part of
Kurdistan, in Syria, there are almost no mountains). Although they met with some defeats, the
resistance has never been completely destroyed, nor can it be. If the Kurds ever do achieve some
rights, the mountains will have played a crucial role.
2

Another effect of the mountains is that in some regions, the tribal composition of Kurdish society is still dominant. Before the mid-twentieth century, Kurdish society was organized primarily
in tribes. Most Kurdish people still have a strong village character–almost every Kurd knows
from which village he/she comes and to which tribe or clan he/she belongs.
—Is Kurdish society traditionally patriarchal? How strong is Kurdish feminism?
—Until the 1980s the Kurdish society was completely patriarchal. There were no women’s
rights or feminist groups, not even among the more liberal Alevi Kurds. The most important
dynamic in overcoming the patriarchal structures became the Kurdish freedom movement. And
without women’s participation, the movement could not possibly have achieved broad popular support. By around 1990 women were participating widely in this movement, and between
1990 and 1992 women were leading demonstrations, which started to change the situation significantly. In the middle of 1990s a broad ideological discussion started in the movement, in
which patriarchal structures in the whole society were criticized systematically. Since then, many
women’s organizations have been founded in all areas of the struggle.
In the 2000s, patriarchal structures in half of Kurdish society—the part influenced directly by
the freedom movement—changed significantly. Women became more present in the streets and
in organizations. Unlike twenty or thirty years ago, women now are accepted everywhere and
murder of women [in honor killings] is not accepted. Most of the other half of Kurdish society
has now been changing too.
Today women are present in all the political structures, at all levels, in the Kurdish freedom
movement, which is a result of the long gender discussion and of women’s struggle within the
movement and in the democratic assemblies. For instance, in the BDP, all chairperson positions
must be held by a man and a woman, and there is a 40 percent requirement for both sexes in all
management boards, public parliaments, and elected councils. As “gender liberation” is one of
the three main principles used by the freedom movement besides “democracy” and “ecology,” a
social perspective without women’s liberation is unthinkable.
—Does assembly democracy have roots in Kurdish history?
—Assembly democracy has limited roots in Kurdistan history and geography. As I’ve said,
the society’s village character was and is still fairly strong. Some villages had hierarchy and
aghas (feudal big land owners), but in others, where these factors were absent, villages organized
common meetings in the kom (village community) in which they made decisions. In many cases,
older women participated in these meetings, but not young women.
In past centuries, tribes sometimes held assemblies with representatives from all families (or
villages) in order to discuss important issues of the tribe or the larger society. The tribal leader
carried out the decisions that the assembly accepted.
During their long history, Kurdish tribes used from time to time and from region to region
a confederal organizational structure for facing political and social challenges. It was based on
voluntariness, so not all tribes of a certain participated in the confederal structure. But in most
of Kurdistan, many non-Kurdish tribes or societies were not much involved in the confederal
system.
In the 1990s, as the Kurdish freedom movement grew stronger, an effort was made to build
up assemblies in “liberated” villages. PKK guerrillas promoted village assemblies, and in villages
where the guerrillas were strong, most of the people accepted them. But just as they were getting
under way, the Turkish army destroyed 4,000 villages and their political structures. Thereafter
the repression intensified. Since 2005, in some of the villages that were close to the freedom move3

ment, this idea has been developed again. Some villages organize regular democratic assemblies,
fully including women and all parts of the society.
—How did communalist ideas become known among Kurds? How important are the
writings of Murray Bookchin? Does communalism have other intellectual sources?
—The Kurdish freedom movement had its ideological sources in the 1968 student movement
and the Turkish left’s Marxist-Leninist, Stalinist, Maoist, Trotskyist, and other communist theories. At the end of the 1980s, the Kurdish freedom movement embarked on a critique of the
actually existing (state) socialist model, and in later years it would be deepened. The critique of
the 1990s said, among other points, that it’s important to change individuals and society before
taking the power of any state, that the relationship between individuals and state must be organized anew and that instead of big bureaucratic-technocratic structures, a full democracy should
be developed.
In 1999, when the PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan was captured and the guerrilla forces were
withdrawn to Iraqi Kurdistan, the freedom movement underwent a process of comprehensive
strategic change. It did not give up the idea of socialism, but it rejected the existing MarxistLeninist structure as too hierarchical and not democratic enough. Political and civil struggle replaced armed struggle as the movement’s center. Starting in 2000, it promoted civil disobedience
and resistance (the Intifada in Palestine was also an inspiration).
Further, the movement gave up the aim of establishing a Kurdish-dominant state, because of
the existing difficult political conditions in the Middle East and the world; instead, it advanced a
long-term solution for the Kurdish question within the four states Turkey, Iran, Iraq and Syria:
democratic confederalism. It now considers it more important to have a democratic, social and
tolerant society than to have one’s own state. For Turkey, it has proposed the foundation of a
second or democratic republic.
During this process of strategic change, the freedom movement activists read and discussed a
new literature that supported and could make contributions to it. It analyzed books and articles
by philosophers, feminists, (neo-)anarchists, libertarian communists, communalists, and social
ecologists. That is how writers like Murray Bookchin, Michel Foucault, and Immanuel Wallerstein
came into their focus.
The Kurdish freedom movement developed the idea of “democratic confederalism” (the Kurdish version of communalism) not only from the ideas of communalist intellectuals but also from
movements like the Zapatistas; from Kurdish society’s own village-influenced history; from the
long, thirty-five-year experience of political and armed struggle; from the intense controversies
within Turkish democratic-socialist-revolutionary movements; and from the movement’s continuous development of transparent structures for the broad population.
—Have those factors and the Declaration of Kurdish Confederalism, published in
March 2005, led to the creation of democratic, decision-making assemblies?
—This declaration was the first step in developing communalism in Kurdistan. Since then, Abdullah Öcalan wrote three comprehensive Defenses, the first in 2001 in two volumes, the second
in 2004, and the last and most comprehensive in 2009 in five volumes, all of which has further
developed the content of the communalism idea.
We foresee communalism as developing first in Turkish Kurdistan. Since 2007 the freedom
movement has created democratic and decision-making assemblies in neighborhoods of cities
where it is strong, particularly in the provinces of Hakkari, Sirnak, Siirt, Mardin, Diyarbakir,
Batman, and Van. The assemblies were established to make decisions on all common problems,
4

challenges, and projects of the respective neighborhood according the principles of a base
democracy—the whole population has the right to participate. In some of the assemblies,
non-Kurdish people are participating, like Azerbaijanis and Aramaic people.
In Diyarbakir, the largest city in Turkish Kurdistan, there are assemblies almost everywhere.
They are stronger in the city than in the rural areas. There are even some assemblies in faraway
Istanbul.
There are assemblies at several levels. At the bottom are the neighborhood assemblies. They
choose the delegates that constitute the city assembly. In Diyarbakir, ideas are discussed in the
city assembly, of which the city council is part—not officially, not legally, but in our system. If
the city assembly makes a certain decision on an issue, then the city council members who are
part of the city assembly will promote it. (But the city council also has members from the other
parties, like the ruling AKP, which don’t agree with it.) The city council has the legal power to
make decisions that become laws. But for the people, the city assembly is the legitimate body.
When decisions on a bigger scale have to be taken, the city and village assemblies of a province
come together. In the provinces of Hakkari and Sirnak, the experience has had very positive
results. The state authority has no influence on the population—the people don’t accept the state
authorities. There are two parallel authorities, of which the democratic confederal structure is
more powerful in the practice.
At the top of this model is the DTK (Democratic Society Congress), which brings together all
Kurds in the Republic of Turkey. It consists of more than five hundred civil society organizations,
labor unions, and political parties—they make up 40 percent of its members; 60 percent of its
members are delegates from village assemblies.
The DTK provincial assemblies were crucial in electing the candidates for the Turkish parliament of the legal pro-Kurdish party, the BDP (Peace and Democracy Party). For the last elections,
the Diyarbakir provincial assembly decided on six candidates chosen by the DTK—those selected
became candidates of the BDP for parliament. (Six of 36 elected candidates are now in prison—the
court did not release them. We don’t know when or whether they will be liberated.)
Slowly but surely, democratic confederalism is gaining acceptance by more Turkish Kurds.
Recently, the DTK presented a draft paper on democratic autonomy for Turkish Kurdistan. At
a big meeting in Diyarbakir in July 14, 2011, the DTK declared itself in support of “democratic
autonomy.” It seeks to realize democratic autonomy step by step, by Kurds’ own means, and
especially where the Kurdish freedom movement is strong. Much of Kurdish society approved,
but the idea was controversial in Turkish society.
—What are the peace villages?
—One result of the discussions of democratic confederalism has been an objective to found new
villages on the communalist idea or transform existing villages whose conditions are suitable for
that. Such villages are to be democratic, ecological, gender equal, and/or even peace villages.
Here peace not only refers to the armed conflict; it expresses the people’s relationships among
themselves and with the natural world. Cooperatives are the economic and material base of these
villages.
The first peace villages were developed in 2010. In Hakkari province, which borders Iraq and
Iran and where the freedom movement is very strong, several villages decided to develop a cooperative economy. The new political and social relationship of the population and the economy
are suitable for that, as the freedom movement is very strong there, with direct support from 90
percent of the society. Close to the city of Weranshah (Viranşehir), the construction of a new
5

village with seventy households based on the idea of peace villages just started. In Van province,
activists have decided to build a new ecological women’s village, which would be something
special. This would enforce the role of women in the society. Women who have been victims of
domestic violence will be accepted. These small communities could supply themselves with all
or almost all the necessary energy.
—How widespread are the assemblies in Turkish Kurdistan?
—In reality, the assembly model has not yet been developed broadly for several reasons. First,
in some places the Kurdish freedom movement is not so strong. Almost half of the population
in Turkey’s Kurdish areas still do not actively support it. In those places there are no few or no
assemblies.
Second, the discussions among the Kurds on democratic confederalism have not proceeded
everywhere as well as they might.
And third, the repression by the Turkish state makes further development very difficult. About
thirty-five hundred activists have been arrested in the past two and a half years, since 2009, which
in many regions has significantly weakened the structures of democratic confederalism. There
have been trials for two years. The military clashes between Turkish Army and the Kurdish
guerrillas are once again on the increase. Seven days ago [c. September 20] they arrested seventy people from a city assembly in a province near the Iraqi border. The state simply says these
assemblies are coordinated by the KCK (Union of Communities in Kurdistan), the umbrella structure of the leftist Kurdish freedom movement in Middle East ,of which today PKK is a part, which
is an illegal structure, and that becomes the pretext for arresting them.
—You take a huge risk, just by participating.
—People have been arrested whose only activity was to participate in a city assembly. In the
last six months 1,650 people have been arrested for being in the KCK.
—What happens to them when they are arrested?
—They go to jail. Eventually they will have a trial, on a charge that the state concocts. But the
delays are long. And they can’t speak Kurdish in the courts, because the state doesn’t accept the
language.
—Are they ever found innocent and freed?
—Of all the thousands of people arrested and charged with KCK membership [see below for
KCK] in recent years, only one has gone free. All the others are in prison.
—You have taken communalism farther than anyone anywhere on the planet—and you
do it under extreme adversity. I want to pause for a moment to let that sink in.
All right. What is the freedom movement’s thinking about the rest of Anatolia, the
non-Kurdish parts of Turkey?
—The Kurds are a large ethnic culture in the Republic of Turkey—25 to 30 percent of the whole
population. They were one of the republic’s two founding cultural elements, but in the years
after the founding in 1924, they were deceived and repressed. The Turkish government has long
rejected any basic and autonomous rights for the Kurds. Even the language was forbidden from
being spoken in the streets.
But for a thousand years before 1924, the relationship between the Turks and the Kurds was
mostly positive, which shows the deep connections between the two cultures. This fact should
be the foundation of reorganizing an equal relationship.
The Turkish Kurds’ legal party, the BDP, proposes “democratic autonomy” for the whole republic. It prepared a document by that name at the end of 2010. Generally it envisages a fundamen6

tal democratization in the Turkey’s political and administrative structure, achieving it through
democratic participation by incorporating people into processes of decision-making. The essential vision is not to create smaller structures with characteristics of the nation-state; rather, the
democratic decision-making structures in the societies should be developed through a combination of base democracy and council democracy.
And rather than being a purely “ethnic” and “territorial” conception, democratic autonomy proposes a regional and local structure through which cultural differences are able to freely express
themselves. Thus it proposes to establish twenty to twenty-five regions in Turkey with major
autonomous rights. These autonomous regions and their assemblies would also assume major
responsibilities in fields like education, health, culture, agriculture, industry, social services and
security, women, youth and sports. The central government would continue to conduct foreign
affairs, finance and external defense services.
In addition, the Kurdish freedom movement demands that Turkish Kurdistan have control over
its own “security,” or self-defense; and the right to manage the natural environment and natural
resources. At the same time it demands that Turkish Kurdistan be able to establish specific social,
cultural, economic and political ties with the other three parts of Kurdistan, in Iran, Iraq and
Syria.
—Do these ideas have support in the Kurdish regions of Iran, Iraq, and Syria?
—In Turkey, the Kurdish freedom movement is in implementation phase, but in the three other
parts, the Kurds are in the first stage of discussing democratic confederalism. The existing Kurdish
parties and organizations that are not part of the Kurdish freedom movement give no importance
to it. They support either full independence for Kurdistan or a classical model of autonomy and
federation.
But organizations that are part of or close to the KCK, and intellectuals and small groups,
promote democratic confederalism as well as the democratic autonomy project of the DTK. The
thirty-five hundred activists arrested since 2009 have all been members of the KCK which is an
illegal organization. Every two years they have meetings with delegates from all four countries—
they meet secretly—in the mountains.
In Iranian Kurdistan, the PJAK (Party for Free Life in Kurdistan), which is part of KCK, promotes democratic confederalism. Especially young Kurds have started to discuss this idea, as it
is different from the past perspectives of an independent state or a federation. Iran, with its very
rich cultural diversity (here there were no massacres or displacements of Kurds, as in Turkey), is
a state where a confederal structure would make much sense. More than the other states, Iranian
society is ready for such a political structure.
In Syrian Kurdistan, the Democratic Union Party (PYD), which is also part of the KCK, promotes democratic confederalism. Many Syrian Kurds have supported the freedom movement
since the 1980s and now promote the idea of confederalism. The PYD became active politically
in the last five to six years. Since the start of the broad protests in Syria in March 2011, this
perspective has become very powerful. The Kurds join the protests and have become a crucial
factor in the whole struggle. They demand not only autonomy but democracy for all of Syria and
democratic autonomy for the Kurdish regions, and the right to organize and defend themselves
against attacks.
Iraqi Kurdistan also has a party that is part of the KCK: the Party for a Democratic Solution
in Kurdistan (PCDK). But this party cannot work legally, as some years ago the regional Kurdish
government forbade it. So democratic confederalism is discussed very only in a very limited
7

way by intellectuals, the media, or the population and is not (yet) a big subject. Only in the
regions close to the borders, which are under the control of the PKK guerrillas, is democratic
confederalism discussed openly and deeply.
But Iraqi Kurdistan has its own constitution and parliament—a more or less autonomous state
in its own right!
Iraqi Kurdistan has no elements of communalism because the regional government is conservative, authoritarian, and non-ecological, and does not support women’s rights. It superficially
has a representative democracy, but in reality the Kurdistan Democratic Party (PDK) and the
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (YNK) share the power fifty-fifty and are very corrupt. Since the
U.S. occupation of Iraq in 2003, all the small progressive elements of these two parties have been
lost.
But in the mountainous areas in Iraqi Kurdistan, the KCK/PKK guerrillas—which control those
areas–have brought a very different understanding. Today in the 60 to 70 villages where the guerrillas are dominant, the population has started to establish democratic assemblies that include
women. The people have started to learn to organize by their own means and to make decisions
based on specific democratic procedures.
As a result we have a very contradictory situation. The region governed by the PDK and the
YNK does not have even the basic elements of a normal Western representative democracy, and
in the region controlled by PKK there are growing elements of democratic confederalism.
The political development in Iraqi Kurdistan shows that even in an oppressed culture, a broad,
base-democratic organization is necessary. It would not help much the Kurds to have their own
state or even autonomy if democracy, participation, tolerance, and ecological orientation are
missing from the political structures and decision-making processes.
—What happens if the popular democracy that spans established state boundaries
makes a decision that collides with one of the four nation-states?
—The Kurdish freedom movement has declared that it is not against existing state boundaries
and does not want to change them. But at the same time the movement expects that the states
respect all decisions of the population. The movement speaks of two authorities, one the state
and the population. In democratic confederalism, two different regions of neighboring states
can come closer, for instance in terms of culture, education, economy, without challenging the
existing states. But in a system of democratic confederalism, the Kurds of different states, or any
other suppressed culture in more than two different states, would come closer after decades of
separation. This aspect is still not defined well und needs to be discussed deeper.
—What is the movement’s thinking about the greater Middle East?
—The Kurdish freedom movement proposes democratic confederalism for all countries and
cultures of Middle East, as it is more appropriate than the existing centralized, half-decentralized,
or totalitarian political structures there. Before the twentieth-century foundation of nation-states
in the Middle East, the structures did not control the societies deeply; the different regions had
certain freedoms and self-government, and the tribal structures were dominant. Here many local
structures are still strong and resist the state influence.
Further, in the Middle East the cultural diversity is so high that a communalist society could
much better consider this richness. It would allow ethnically or religiously nondominant groups
to organize themselves and contribute significantly to a dynamic cultural diversity. Direct democratic structures may make sense here too: in the recent uprisings in many countries, new demo-

8

cratic movements were born or have been strengthened. We would like to object to opinions that
consider Arabs or other populations incapable of democratic thinking.

9

The Anarchist Library
Anti-Copyright

Janet Biehl
Kurdish Communalism
Sep. 10 2011
http://new-compass.net/article/kurdish-communalism. Proofread online source RevoltLib.com,
retrieved on November 20, 2020.
theanarchistlibrary.org

