STRUGGLE

UNITY
MARXIST-LENINIST UNITE!

WIN THE ADVANCED TO COMMUNISM!

£

BUILD A REVOLUTIONARY MARXIST-LENINIST COMMUNIST PARTY BASED ON MARXISM-LENINISM-MAO TSETUNG THOUGHT!

Vol. VI No. 1-6

25 CENTS

POLITICAL ORGAN OF THE REVOLUTIONARY COMMUNIST LEAGUE (M-L-M)

MAY-JUNE EDITION 1977

LONG LIVE MAY DAY & AFRICAN
LIBERATION DAY! WORKERS &
OPPRESSED NATIONS&PEOPLES, UNITE!
BUILD A REVOLUTIONARY MARXISTLENINIST COMMUNIST PARTY IN THE
USA BASED ON MARXISMLENINISM-MAO TSETUNG THOUGHT!

Chairman Mao Tsetung, great leader and teacher of the proletariat and oppressed
people throughout the world. On May Day and ALD make the central task of party
building a mass question gripping every class conscious worker in the USA!

MAY DAY

“Comrade workers! May Day is
coming, the day when the workers of all
lands celebrate their awakening to a
class conscious life, their solidarity in
the struggle against all coercion and op­
pression of man by man, the struggle to
free the toiling millions from hunger,
poverty and humiliation. Two worlds
stand facing each other in this great
struggle: the world of capital and the
world of labor, the world of exploi­
tation and slavery and the world of
brotherhood and freedom.
“On one side stand the handful of rich
blood-suckers. They have seized the fac­
tories and mills, the tools and
machinery, have turned millions of
acres of land and mountains of money
into their private property. They have
made the government and army their
servants, faithful watchdogs of the
wealth they have amassed.___________
African Liberation Day
May 28, 1977

“On the other side stand the millions
of the disinherited. They are forced to
beg the moneybags for permission to
work for them. By their labor they
create all the wealth; yet all their lives
long they have to struggle for a crust of
bread, beg for work as for charity, sap
their strength and health by backbreak­
ing toil, and starve in hovels in the
villages or in the cellars and garrets of
the big cities.”
These are the words of Comrade
Lenin, the great leader and teacher of
the working class, written in 1904, and
still they ring true today. May Day is
International Workers Day, the day
workers of all nationalities celebrate the
struggles of the working class to fulfill
its historic mission to abolish explo­
itation and oppression and to free
humanity.
It was at the 2nd Congress of the 2nd
International in 1889 that May 1st was
designated as International Workers
{Continued on page 12)

Long Live Malcolm X, study his life and his words on May 19th and remember that
Malcolm X knew our struggle is an international struggle and he sounded the struggle
of the 3rd World vs. imperialism. Oppose both superpowers on ALD!

R C L’S POSITION ON PARTY BUILDING
Part 2
Periods and Stages
RCL holds that there are three basic
periods in the life of the party, and
Stalin, in summing up the history of the
Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik),
pointed these basic periods out very
clearly, “a) the period of the formation
of the vanguard (i.e., the party) of the
proletariat, the period of mustering the
party’s cadres (in this period the party
was weak; it had a program and general
principles of tactics, but as a party of
mass action it was weak.
b) the period of revolutionary mass
struggle under the leadership of the
Communist Party. In this period the
party was transformed from an
organization for mass agitation into an
organization for mass action; the period
of preparation was superseded by the
period cf revolutionary action, c) the
period after taking power, after the

Communist Party had become the
government party.” (Stalin Strategy &
Tactics, pg. 29-30)
Generally we view a period as an
interval of time marked by the coming in
and going out of an objective process.
Stages are determined by the
development of a process. By there be(Continued on page 6)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Pre-Civil War Revolutionary
Black Nationalism................. .P.4
Stalin was a great
Marxist-Leninist........................... P.5
Dialectical and Historical
Materialism.....................
P.10
RCL Editorial......................................P.12

AFRIKAN LIBERATION DAY
STORY ON PAGE 2

Page 2

Unity & Struggle

ALD MAY 28: OPPOSE BOTH SUPERPOWERS
“Present-day democracy will remain true to itself only if it joins neither one nor the other imperialist
bourgeoisie, only if it says that the two sides are equally bad, and if it wishes the defeat of the
imperialist bourgeoisie in every country. Any other decision will, in reality, be national-liberal and
have nothing in common with genuine internationalism.” - V.l. Lenin, “Under A False Flag.”
trend in the world today. The danger of
a world war and revolution are the two
aspects of an entity - the world
situation.” “The world is changing in a
direction increasingly favourable to the
people of all countries. This is one
aspect, a principal aspect. But we must
also see the other aspect - the aggressive
nature of imperialism will not change.
The danger of a new world war still ex­
ists. This is another trend in the
development of today’s world. It is dan­
gerous if we only see the raging flames
of the revolution without noticing the
enemies sharpening their swords and
think we can lower our vigilance
because of the excellent situation.”
(Study Philosophy, “Theory of Two
Points,” pg. 8) (Our emphasis).

that according to the teachings of Marx­
ism-Leninism, without a correct stand,
line and policy on the national-libera­
tion movement and the peoples’ revolu­
tionary movement in the countries of
Asia, Africa and Latin America, it will
be impossible for the workers’ parties in
the metropolitan imperialist countries
to have a correct stand, line and policy
on the struggle waged by the working
class and the broad masses of the people
in their own countries.” (from the ar­
ticle, “More on the differences between
Comrade Togliatti and Ourselves”)
What this means is that the movements
for proletarian revolution in the ad­
vanced capitalist countries and the
revolutionary movements in the Third
World and exploited countries are inex­
tricably linked and intertwined and
share common interests and therefore
cannot be separated from each other.
In order for us to understand that link­
up better, we must go back in history to
the 1950’s, after the death of Stalin,
when the renegade traitor Krushchov
came to power under the capitalist
program of the three peacefuls: peaceful
coexistence with imperialism, peaceful
competition with imperialism,
and
peaceful transition to socialism. This
revisionist program was initially pushed
at the 20th Congress of the CPSU, in
1957. At the same time, a vicious
slanderous attack was made upon Com­
rade Stalin, all in an attempt to seize
power. “Being the first state of the dic­
tatorship of the proletariat, the Soviet
Union lacked experience in consolidat­
ing this dictatorship and preventing the
restoration of capitalism. In these cir(Continued on page 3)

The complicated political struggle around ALD 1977 required Marxist-Leninists and
The RCL holds that, an incorrect line
advanced forces to have a clear mind so we can lead the masses to oppose both super­ on the international situation makes it
powers1 imperialist designs in Southern Africa and throughout the world.
totally impossible for one to have a cor­
rect line on the domestic situation. In
armed provocations and invaded Zaire.
the polemics waged by the Communist
The
Revolutionary Communist
The present invasion of Zaire by mer­
Party of China against the revisionist
League (MLM) sees African Libera­
cenaries
from
Angola
is
unprecedented
Togliatti,
the CPC states: “The Pro­
tion Day as an important time to focus
in scale, scope and duration. As
letariat of the capitalist countries of
on the liberation of Africa from imper­
organizer and commander of the mer­
Europe and America, too, must stand in
ialism, social imperialism, hegemon­
cenary
troops
in
Angola,
the
Soviet
the
forefront of those supporting the
ism,
colonialism,
neocolonialism,
social-imperialists
cannot
absolve
revolutionary struggles of the oppressed
racism, Zionism and all reaction. In the
nations and peoples of Asia, Africa, and
themselves of their crime.” (Peking
year 1977 it is becoming more and more
Latin America. In fact, such support
Review #13, 1977 pg. 16)
important for the proletariat of the
When our Chinese comrades talk
simultaneously helps the cause of the
world to see and understand just what is
about
the
“
storm
centers
of
world
emancipation
of the proletariat in
happening in Africa.
revolution” being Asia, Africa and
Europe and America. . .Therefore the
Latin America, they are making this
proletarian parties of the metropolitan
Africa today has 46 independent determination based on their analysis
imperialist countries are duty bound to
countries, making up 94% of the land that the underdeveloped countries of
heed the voice of the revolutionary
base and 90% of the population is in Asia, Africa and Latin America
people in these regions, study their ex­
those same areas. Africa is the second constitute “the weakest link in the
perience, respect their revolutionary
largest continent in the world with a imperialist chain” and that therefore the
feelings, and support their revolution­
total population of over 390 million key to the victorious fight against imper­
ary struggles.. .It should be understood
people. The African continent is rich ialism and social-imperialism is to be
with such natural resources as oil, gold, found in the revolutionary struggles of
diamonds and precious metals and this the peoples of those areas, which is why
imNAIIONALIST
is objectively why the superpowers, all Marxist-Leninists and advanced
United States and the Soviet Union, are forces must support all revolutionary
both struggling to get a foothold in Af­ struggles of all countries. This is what
rica. First we witnessed “lying Henry the Stalin meant when he said, “It means
10SSARY
K” running around Africa with his that support must be given to such
checkbook offering money to anyone national movements as tend to weaken,
3 WORLDS THESIS
who would take it with hardly anybody to overthrow imperialism, and not to
taking it because everyone is wise to the strengthen and preserve it.” Foun­
The scientific thesis on the three
king the U.S. and the USSR in its
“old wounded tiger” and its treacherous dations of Leninism, pg. 74) What these
worlds by comrade Mao Tsetung, is the
behind throughout Africa, Asia, and
imperialist tricks of exploitation and things also mean is that in a sense “the
result of a penetrating analysis of the
Latin America. Meanwhile the US and
oppression. What we have just recently whole cause of the international pro­
international situation. By applying the
the
USSR are locked in rivalry for
seen is Fidel Castro and one of his letarian revolution hinges on the out­
scientific method of dialectical
hegemony
over the globe, US imper­
bosses, N.V. Podgorny, who is the presi­ come of the revolutionary struggles of
materialism, Chairman Mao summed
ialism
is
clearly
on the decline internally
dent of the Presidium of the Soviet the peoples of these areas who consti­
up a wide range of data and documents
and abroad, while the USSR is the most
Union, running around Africa waving tute the overwhelming majority of the
in order to make a concrete class
dangerous source of war and the most
the Soviet Union’s checkbook. These world’s population.” (Statement of 10
analysis of the world situation. “In this
aggressive, because it is the latecomer at
two villains represent the main danger CC Members of Ceylon Communist
situation of *great disorder under
the imperialist feast!
to the people of the world today because Party, pg. 20).
heaven,’ all the political forces in the
The Third World constitutes a
they are traveling around using the dis­
All of these events once again point
world have undergone drastic division
revolutionary
motive force propelling
guise of “socialists and believing in pro­ out to the world that it is imperialism
and realignment through prolonged
forward
the
wheel
of history and it is the
letarian internationalism” and many and social-imperialism which represent
trials of strength and struggle. A large
main force combating colonialism,
honest forces will be deceived by them. the main obstruction to the indepen­
number of Asian, African and Latin
imperialism and hegemonism in the
There is no doubt in our minds just who dence and liberation of the people of Af­
American countries have achieved inde­
world.
planned these friendly “tours of friend­ rica and the oppressed peoples all over
pendence one after another and they are
The Second World, the developed
ship and cooperation”: the Social the world. But this obstruction to libera­
playing an even greater role in inter­
countries between the superpowers and
Imperialists, meaning the Soviet Union tion and independence is causing “great
national affairs. As a result of the
the third world, exploit the third world
because they are socialist in words but disorder” which is a good thing because
emergence of social-imperialism, the
through colonial or neocolonial
imperialist in deeds. Witness Angola this “great disorder” is one in which
socialist camp which existed for a time
relations, but at the same time they are
where we watched the tragic degenera­ imperialism, social-imperialism and
after World War II is no longer in ex­
themselves, in varying degrees con­
tion of Cuba into mercenary lackies for reactionaries of various countries have
istence. Owning to the law of the uneven
trolled, threatened or bullied by one
the Soviet Union to kill Angolans so been thrown into confusion and this
development of capitalism, the Western
superpower or the other. And some of
that the Soviet Union could get the oil reflects an excellent situation in which
imperialist bloc, too, is disintegrating.
them have been reduced to dependency
reserves in Cabinda, putting all of countries want independence^ nations
Judging from the changes in inter­
by the superpowers, especially the one
Angola’s resources right at the feet of want liberation and the people want
national relations, the world today ac­
under the signboard of “socialism”.
the Soviet Union who have immediately revolution. And while the people want
tually consists of three parts, or three
Strategically, Europe is the focus of the
set up an “international division of and struggle to make revolution in their
worlds, that are both interconnected
contention between the two super­
labor” which really means imperialism. countries we must also be aware and
and in contradiction to one another.
powers, while their contention extends
watch the constant struggle between the
The United States and the Soviet Union
over the entire globe.
superpowers who must continually con­
make up the First World. The develop­
Also, let’s check, out just what is
“We should unite with the third world
front each other as they try to outing countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin
happening in Zaire “. . .since the Soviet
(comprising about 80 percent of the
maneuver each other for who will con­
America and other regions make up the
Union extended its influence into
world’s population) which constitutes
trol the world. Inevitably this will lead
Third World. The developed countries
Angola, it has not only dispatched over
the principal force in the struggle
to war and as Lenin said “Imperialism
between the two make up the Second
10,000 foreign mercenary troops to
against the two superpowers.” (Taken
means war” and the people must get pre­
World.” (Peking Review, No. 15, April
Angola but also mustered a large
from THumanite Rouge, as quoted in
pared or we will suffer. But in observing
12, 1974-supplement)
number of the old colonialists’ remnant
Peking Review No 5, 1977)
these two trends, we as Marxist-Lenin­
Chairman Mao consistently urged
forces there to serve its aggressive activ­
“For the Marxist-Leninists Com­
ists, must make an analysis of which is
and taught us “that it was imperative to munists of France, as for their Chinese
ities. Under the command of the Soviet
principal and which is secondary and to
unite with all forces that can be united to
social-imperialists, this contingent of
comrades and comrades in many other
further
lay this out clearer we quote
form the broadest united front and
mercenary troops, the largest in the Af­
countries, the article said, the concept f
from our Chinese comrades who say,
isolate the enemy as far as possible.”
rican continent today, has brutally sup­
the three worlds is the point oi depar re
“the danger of a new world war still ex­
(P.R.No. 5, 1977)
pressed the Angolan people’s struggle
in working out their proletarian revolu­
ists, and the people of all countries must
The Third World has risen in revolt
against imperialism, colonialism, and
tionary strategy and tactics adapted to
get prepared. But revolution is the main
against both superpowers and it is kic­ the world today.” (Ibid., p.30)
hegemonism, and repeatedly made

____________________________________ Unity & Struggle

MOTION!!

COUNTRIES WANT INDEPENDENCE,
NATIONS WANT LIBERATION
PEOPLE WANT REVOLUTION!

_______________________________________________________ Page 3

African Liberation Day
(Continued from page 2)

cumstances and after Stalin’s death,
Krushchov, a capitalist-roader in power
hiding in the Soviet Communist Party,
came out with a surprise attack in his
‘secret report’ viciously slandering
Stalin and by every kind of treacherous
maneuver usurped Party and govern­
ment power in the Soviet Union. This
was a counter-revolutionary coup d’etat
which turned the dictatorship of the
proletariat into the dictatorship of the
bourgeoisie and which overthrew social­
ism and restored capitalism.” (Leninism
or Social Imperialism, pg. 13-14).
Krushchov’s program of the three
peacefuls was an act of siding with
enemies and opposing friends - siding
with imperialism against the national
liberation movements (for example we
all remember the traitorous Krushchov
voting along with the USA in the UN to
send in Belgian troops to kill the great
“So long as the patriotic forces of Zimbabwe unite and perseve re in armed struggle, rely revolutionary Patrice Lumumba in the
on the armed people, combat all interference in their internal affairs and keep the Congo), siding with the bourgeoisie
initiative in their own hands, victory will belong to them.” — Ikwezi
against the proletariat and siding with
imperialists against the socialist camp
Soviet Mercenaries’
quickening of the bourgeoisie’s move to
which had been built up under the
Invasion of Zaire
the right. The bourgeoisie’s use of terror
glorious leadership of the Soviet Union
Condemned
against the people and their
during Stalin’s time.
revolutionary movement intensifies day
The Soviet mercenaries’ invasion of
He immediately began to try to split
by day, as U.S. imperialism is shifting
Zaire has further exposed the socialand sidetrack the Marxist-Leninist par­
more and more of the brunt and burden
imperialists’ features as aggressors and
ties that were in the socialist camp at the
of the economic, political, military, &
expansionists. The leaders of some Af­
time by liquidating the dictatorship of
social crisis onto the backs of the wor­
rican^ countries wrote to President
the proletariat in the Soviet Union and
king class, oppressed nationalities and
Mobutu or issued statements vofcing
under the guise of “creative Marxism”
the
working
masses
in
general.
The
solidarity and support for Zaire in
he tried to replace class struggle with
bourgeoisie knows that the rebellions in
counterattacking the aggression in
class conciliation and tried to impose
the 60’s, as Rap Brown foretold, were
defense of its territorial integrity. They
revisionism on all the other parties. But
stressed that African countries should just a dress rehearsal for the revolution
this was met with consistent struggle by
to come. The bourgeoisie knows that the
strengthen their unity and defend the
genuine Marxist-Leninists, led by the
working class & oppressed nationalities
independence and liberation cause of
Communist
Party of China, headed by
will not take the brunt of the economic
Africa.
Chairman
Mao
Tsetung, and the Party
crisis
passively,
so
the
bourgeois
state
Referring to the invasion of Zaire’s
of Labor of Albania, headed by Com­
has refined a whole arsenal of deadly
Shaba
Region,
Seewoosagur
rade Enver Hoxha. The modern
means of devastating and destroying the
Ramgoolam, current Chairman of the
revisionists were partially successful in
openly
revolutionary
elements
among
Organization of African Unity and
wrecking
the unity of the socialist camp
the
masses.
Cointelpro,
was
a
means
in
Prime Minister of Mauritius, on March
and then began to travel down the
the 60’s, but the capitalists are putting
29 sent a letter to President Mobutu ex­
logical path of collaborating with
together more filth in its arsenal of ter­
pressingfull support and solidarity for
imperialism,
restoring capitalism and
ror
against
the
masses./
Zaire on behalf of the O.A.U. and the
then becoming a social-imperialist
Jimmy Carter is the smiling swastika,
Mauritian Government. The letter said:
power themselves. This breakup of the
the latest bourgeois diversionary tactic,
“The news of the violation of the ter­
socialist
camp, the continued
being
used
to
usher
in
fascism
in
the
ritorial integrity of Zaire, a fraternal
revolutionary struggles of the 3rd
U.S., and everyday we can get clearer
country and member of the
World, and the ascendancy of the Soviet
and clearer that behind Carter’s smile is
Organization of African Unity, has
Union as an imperialist superpower in
the
stinking
breath
of
fascism!
Some
aroused indignation not only among the
direct contention with the USA for
people have been misled, have been
member states of the O.A.U. but also
world domination, are the continuation
tricked by the so-called liberalism of the
among all the people who cherish peace
which characterized the world by the
Democrats,
but
we
must
get
our
minds
and freedom.” — Peking Review
end of the 1960’s.
clear that Carter is just another example
But the continued development of the
CASTRO’S MOSCOW VISIT
of the dual tactics of the bourgeoisie
revolutionary movements of the peoples
aimed
against
the
great
masses
of
the
Co-ordinated Soviet-Cuban
of the 3rd World also proved that
people. So while we get the very empty
Action in Southern Africa
revolution was an irresistable trend that
cosmetic
noises
of
“
progress
”
&
President Fidel Castro of the State
could not be stopped, even by revision­
“liberalism” & promise you this and
Council of Cuba paid an “unofficial
ist betrayals. Taking all this into con­
promise
you
that,
in
the
meantime,
on
visit” to Moscow from April 4 to 8 after
sideration, Chairman Mao summed up
the
real
side,
we
are
getting
the
most
his recent tour of Algeria, Angola,
these developments, and came forth
Tanzania, Mozambique and Democ­ ruthless terrorist blows against the
with the scientific formulation of three
people.
This
is
what
Carter
represents,
ratic Yemen, Somalia and Ethiopia in the
worlds. The RCL takes the position that
and
the
bourgeoisie
uses
lieutenants
like
Red Sea region. This timing and
this was and still is the correct MarxistCarter
precisely
as
the
opium
against
the
background of his Moscow visit have at­
Leninist analysis of the balance of class
masses, because the masses would not
tracted people’s attention.
forces in the world today. “The Soviet
sit
still
long
enough
under
the
rule
of
a
In its April 5 commentary AFP said:
revisionist clique came to power in the
Gerald Ford, but the bourgeoisie is ban­
“There was no doubt that the two Af­
Soviet Union and turned that country
king
on
diverting
our
attention
from
the
rican tours (by Podgorny and Castro)
into social-imperialism with the result
revolutionary
tasks
that
face
us
in
were the result ofjoint planning between
that the socialist camp which had ex­
smashing
this
evil
system,
by
putting
Moscow and Havana, just as Cuba’s
isted for a time was no longer in exist­
Carter out there with a Howdy Doody
decisive 1975 intervention in Angola
ence. Present international relations
smile.
These
are
the
bourgeoisie
’
s
stan
­
was prepared by the Kremlin.” It also
show that the world today actually con­
dard counterrevolutionary dual tactics
pointed out that the Moscow talks were
sists of three parts, or three worlds that
which they aim against the people, the
“probably aimed at coordinating
are both interconnected and in con­
carrot & the stick, deception & terror,
Soviet- Cuban action in southern Af­
tradiction to one another. The two
and we must all get a clear mind on the
rica” and “probably with regard to the
superpowers make up the First World.
kind of political struggle & organization
horn of Africa.” — Peking Review
In between the superpowers and the
it will take to end this oppression.
developing countries, the developed
ASSATA SHAKUR
Genuine Marxist-Leninists and ad­
countries make up the Second World.
The recent sentencing of Assata
The developing countries in Asia, Af­
vanced forces will not be diverted from
Shakur (Joanne Chesimard) to life, plus
rica, Latin America and other regions
our central revolutionary task in the
33 years in an all men’s state prison was
make up the Third World.” (“Great
U.S. today, which is the building of a
the last of a whole series of acts of racist
Motive Force in Advancing World His­
Revolutionary
Marxist-Leninist
violent repression against this
tory”, Peking Review #44, 1974) And
Communist Party based on the science
revolutionary black fighter. The county
further, examining the relations of the
of revolution, Marxism-Leninism-Mao
prosecutor openly called Shakur “an
Three Worlds to each other, “The vast
Tsetung Thought. And we understand
animal” in the court and the all-white
number of Third World countries now
that central task involves and shapes all
jury was a willing part of the bourgeois
constitutes the main force in the struggle
the other revolutionary tasks of the day.
state repression aimed at the black
against colonialism and imperialism,
We support Assata Shakur in her
liberation movement generally, and par­
particularly the superpowers. There are
struggle against bourgeois state repres­
ticularly Shakur. But Assata Shakur’s
conflicts of basic interest and extremely
sion, that is three-fold in her case, as the
case must be looked at very closely,
acute contradictions between them and
bourgeoisie oppresses & represses her
because it signifies a higher level of
the superpowers. The situation in the
because she is one of the working
bourgeois terror against the
Second World in between the two is a
masses, an Afro-American patriot
revolutionary movement in the U.S?, the
complicated one. Some countries in it
(Continued on page 11)

still retain in one form or another
colonialist relations with Third World
countries. At the same time all the
Second World countries controlled,
threatened, or bullied in varying degrees
by one superpower or the other, also are
inclined to oppose superpower
hegemonism.” (Ibid.) The RCL also
holds that this correct analysis is the
basis for the strategy of the United
Front against the superpowers, uniting
the majority of the people in the world.
In studying this important analysis we
can also see the example of applying the
method of seeing the general and the
particular in a dialectical way. In sum­
ming up the international situation.
Chairman Mao also summed up the his­
torical development of the People’s
Republic of China. Comrade Chou En
Lai stated, “The Third World is the
main force in combating colonialism,
imperialism and hegemonism. China is
a developing socialist country belong­
ing to the Third World.” (Chou En Lai,
Report on the Work of the Govern­
ment, Fourth National People’s
Congress of the PRC, Jan. 1975).
Genuine communists and advanced
forces must uphold the concept of the
three worlds and the correct strategy of
the United Front against the super­
powers. And as the Chinese comrades
pointed out, “The practice of struggle by
the people of the world in the past year
provided added proof that the concept
about the actual existence of three
worlds fully conforms to reality and the
scientific analysis of classes.” (Peking
Review #1, Jan. 1976)
Right Opportunism in ALSC
At the last Steering Committee meet­
ing of the African Liberation Support
Committee, which was held in Wash­
ington, D.C., the Revolutionary
Workers Congress (RWC) objectively
forced a split in the ranks of the organi­
zations which were working in ALSC,
by endorsing a demonstration that was
being put on by the “Revolutionary
Communist Party” (“RCP”). This was
brought out clearly in the open when the
“RCP” listed the names of RWC and
ALSC chapters which are controlled by
RWC, on a leaflet asking people to
come to Washington, D.C. and support
African Liberation Day by marching on
the White House. This demonstration is
scheduled for the same day and time
(May 28, 1977) as the ALSC’s demon­
stration and rally, so how did RWC plan
to participate in both? The fact of the
matter is that RWC had originally
planned all along to have ALSC par­
ticipate in the “RCP” demonstration
urtder their leadership (“RCP”) and
when RWC’s plan was disrupted by the
other organizations within ALSC on the
Steering Committee, who voted not to
form a coalition of other so-called
“progressive organizations,” then RWC
had no choice but to follow their true
opportunistic style and force the split.
To lay out briefly what has happened,
is that up until recently, the RWC has
had a “majority bloc” on the Steering
Committee (SC) and whenever a vote
came about they were able to win the
vote based on the “majority bloc” and
them also controlling the most chapters.
Recently the Workers Viewpoint
Organization, Revolutionary Com­
munist League (M-L-M), and other pro­
gressive forces within ALSC brought
the two-line struggle to a climax in the
April 2nd SC meeting which was held in
Newark, N.J., in which they reversed all
of the previous SC decisions,
specifically the “coalition” thrust. RWC
was present at this meeting and even
though they voted against the final
decisions of the SC, the majority of the
SC voted against the “coalition” thrust.
What RWC did instead of laying out
that they had already contacted people
and had actually put the “coalition”
thrust into motion, at the meeting they
cried and moaned about “left sectarian­
ism” and “leftism” and etc. They never
once layed out the fact that they had
united with the “RCP” to put on a
counter demonstration to the one we
were actually sitting in the meeting plan* (Continued on page 9)

Page 4

Unity & Struggle

PRE CIVIL WAR REVOLUTIONARY BLACK NATIONALISM
The series "Pre Civil War Black
Nationalism" was put together in 1966f
by Bill McAdoo, as part of the "Black
Liberation
Commission" of the
Progressive Labor Party. McAdoo was
one of those arrestedfor refusing to tes­
tify against PL’s Bill Ept on who was
charged with "Criminal Anarchy"in the
Harlem Rebellion in 1964. Obviously
the Ept on-McAdoo period, and the ar­
ticle itself arefrom a lime when PL was
struggling to take progressive stands.
Since then however, and sadly Progres­
sive Labor has become the most out­
rageous carriers of the American
sickness, white chauvinism, and are now
not even a serious communist
organization.
Unfortunately white
chauvinism has always stood in the way
ofthe construction andgrowth ofa truly
vanguard communist party, in the USA.
Now as then!
Part 12

“Many of those who advocate eman­
cipation as a military necessity seem
puzzled to know what is best to be done
with the slave, if he is set at liberty.
Colonization in Africa. Hayti, Florida
and South America are favorite theories
with many well-informed persons. 1 his
is really interesting! No wonder Europe
does not sympathize with you. You are
the only people, claiming to be civilized,
who take away the rights of those whose
color differs from your own. If you find
that you cannot rob the Negro of his
labor and of himself, you will banish
him! What a sublime idea! You are cer­
tainly a great people! What is ylur plea?
Why, that the slaveholders will not per­
mit us to live among them as freemen,
and that the air of Northern Latitudes is
not good for us! Let me tell you my
friends, the slaveholders are not the men
we dread! (Hear, hear.) They do not
desire to have us removed. The Nor­
thern pro-slavery men have done the
free people of color ten-fold more injury

ROCK’S DECLARATION ON THE
NATURE OF BLACK CAPTIVITY,
1862
During the second year of the Civil
War, Dr. John S. Rock delivered a
speech at the annual meeting of the
Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society,
which exposed the fundamental roots of
black captivity in America. This
brilliant address speaks for itself.
“This nation is mad. In its devoted at­
tachment to the Negro, it has run crazy
after him, (laughter,) and now, having
caught him, hangs on with a deadly
grasp, and says to him, with more
earnestness and pathos than Ruth ex­
pressed to Naomi, “Where thou goest, I
will go; where thou lodgest, I will lodge;
thy people shall be my people, and thy
God my God.’(laughterand applaude.).

“The educated and wealthy class des­
pise the Negro, because they have
robbed him of his hard earnings, or, at
least, have got rich off the fruits of his
labor; and they believe if he gets his
freedom, their fountain will be dried up,
and they will be obliged to seek business
in a new channel. Their ’occupation will
be gone.’ The lowest class hate him
because he is poor, as they are and he is a
competitor with them for the same
labor. The poor ignorant whiteman,
who does- not understand that the
interest of the laboring classes is mutual,
argues in this wise: ’Here is so much
labor to be performed,—that Negro
does it. If he was gone, I should have his
place.’ The rich and the poor are both
prejudiced from interest, and not
because they entertain vague notions of
justice and humanity. . .
“Our humane political philosophers
are puzzled to know what would
become of the slave if they were eman­
cipated! The idea seems to prevail that
the poor things would suffer, if robbed
of the glorious privileges they now en­
joy! If they could not be flogged, half­
starved, and work to support in ease and
luxury those who have never waived an
opportunity to outrage and wrong
them, they would pine away and die! Do
you imagine that the Negro can live out­
side of slavery? Of course, now, they can
take care of themselves and their
masters too; but if you give them their
liberty, must they not suffer? (Laughter
and applause.) Have you never been
able to see through all this? Have you
not observed that the location of this
organ of sympathy is in the pocket of the
slaveholder and the man who shares in
the profits of slave labor? Of course you
have; and pity those men who have lived
upon their ill-gotton wealth. You know,
if they do not have somebody to work
for them, they must leave their gilded
salons, and take off their coats and roll
up their sleeves, and take their chances
among the live men of the world. This,
you are aware, these respectable gen­
tlemen will not do, for they have been so
long accustomed to live by robbing and
cheating the Negro, that they are sworn
never to work while they can live by
plunder, (applause.). . .

defensive, we are now prepared to at­
tack the enemy. This is simply a change
of tactics. 1 think 1 see the finger of God
in all this. Yes, there is the hand-writing
on the wall: 1 come not to bring peace,
but the sword. Break every yoke, and let
the oppressed go free. 1 have heard the
groans of my people, an am come down
to deliver them! (Loud and long-con­
tinued applaude.). . .
“It is true the Government is but little
more anti-slavery now than it was at the
commencement of the war; but while
fighting for its own existence, it has been
obliged to take slavery by the throat,
and sooner or later must choke her to
death. (Loud applause.)...’’

BLACK

REVOLUTIONARY
NATIONALISM
VS. BLACK ZIONISM
Not only did revolutionary
nationalism undermine the authority
and influence of the white liberal
managers, but it also dealt a damaging
blow to black Zionism. Black Zionism
could only satisfy the greedy ambitions
of unprincipled opportunists, who were
willing to sacrifice the interests of the en­
slaved black masses. Revoluntionary
nationalism had history on its side, and
it corresponded to the most vital
interests of the black masses. Black
Zionists cried long and loud about the
rape of black women, the murder and
plunder of black manhood, and the bar­
barian, racist cruelty of the oppressor.
And their charges were true. But the
black Zionists were willing to leave their
mothers to the lust of the oppressor.
They were willing to abandon the en­
slaved black masses in order to seek

Editorial
Charles Lenox Remond was a delegate
to the London Anti-Slavery
Conference.
than the Southern slave-holders. (Hear,
hear) In the South, it is simply a ques­
tion of dollars and cents. The
slaveholder cares no more for you than
he does for me. They enslave their own
children, and sell them, and they would
as soon enslave white men as black men.
The secret of the slaveholder’s at­
tachment to slavery is to be found in the
dollar, and that he is determined to get
without working for it. There is not pre­
judice against color among the
slaveholders. Their social system and
one million of miilattoes are facts which
no arguments can demolish. (Ap­
plause). . .
“When the orange is squeezed, we
throw it aside. (Laughter.) The black
man is a good fellow while he is a slave,
and toils for nothing, but the moment he
claims his own flesh and blood and
bones, he is a most obnoxious creature,
and there is a proposition to get rid of
him! He is happy while he remains a
poor, degraded ignorant slave, without
even the right to his own offspring.
While in this condition, the master can
ride in the same carriage, sleep in the
same bed, and nurse from the same
bosom. But give this same slave the right
to use his own legs, his hands, his body
and his mind, and this happy and
desirable creature is instantly
transformed into a miserable and
loathsome wretch, fit only to be
colonized somewhere near the moun­
tains of the moon, oc eternally banished
from the presence of all civilized beings.
You must not lose sight of the fact that it
is the emancipated slave and the free
colored man whom it is proposed to
remove—not the slave; this country and
climate are perfectly adapted to Negro
slavery; it is the free black that the air is
not good for! What an idea! A country
good for slavery, and not good for
freedom!. . .
“I do not regard this trying hour as a
darkness. The war that has been waged
on us for more than two centuries has
opened our eyes and caused us to form
alliances, so that instead of acting on the

(Continued from page 11)
Advanced Worker
RCL has also had struggle with LPR
around the question of the make-up of
the U.S. working class. RCL is still
studying theoretical and statistical
materials on this as well as using prac­
tical information from the worksites
where we have cadre. LPR uses the term
intermediate to describe the average
worker. RCL has questioned this and
asked them to show references. LPR
was supposed to have shown us where
Lenin uses “Intermediate” in describing
the average worker several months ago,
this hasn’t been done yet. Also LPR
used the term backward and lower
strata interchangeably (vol. 8, No. 3-4,
pg. 5) most recently. These terms do not
mean the same thing. Lenin uses the
word backward to describe a workers
political consciousness. There can be
backward in any strata, lower, average
and the “better situated strata” Lower
strata represents an economic strata as
well as political consciousness, because
of their economic situation workers
from this strata are usually at a lower
level of consciousness although you will
find some advanced in the lower strata.
Lenin further clarifies this distinction,
“Even the most backward worker will
understand the idea, provided of course,
the agitator or propagandist is able to
approach him in such a way as to com­
municate the idea to him, to explain it in
understandable language on the basis of
facts the worker knows from everyday
experience. But this condition is just as
indispensable
for
clarifying the
economic struggle: in this field too, the
backward worker from the lower or
middle strata of the masses will not be
able to assimilate the general idea of
economic struggle; it is an idea that can
be absorbed by a few educated workers
whom the masses will follow guided by
their instincts and their direct,
immediate interests.” (Lenin, CW,
vol.4, pg.291)
The Woman Question
On the woman question we agree with
LPR on lines such as, the woman ques­
tion is a class question and cannot be
resolved within the realms of bourgeois
society. That one must always point to
the dictatorship pf the proletariat and

their fortune in Africa or whcrecver else
they hoped to find the promised land.
Need we raise the question as to the true
depth of their concern, or the real
measure of their sincerity? Did they
merely berate the crimes of the op­
pressor , as a buying and selling point to
put gold and glory in their own pocket?
Afro-American history has put a
judgment upon black Zionism—a
judgment from which I cannot escape
no matter when or where, or in what
new form, it might raise its head. It may
flourish for a time, buh it cannot escape
thah judgment.
An example of the defeats suffered by
the black Zionists during the period
under consideration can be found in the
proceedings of the Emigration Conven­
tion, held in Cleveland, Ohio August 2426, 1854. We have previously made
reference to the speech made by the
black Zionist, H. Ford Douglass, at this
convention. It was revolutionary
nationalism which won the day at the
Convention as the following excerpts
from the Platform: or Declaration of
Sentiments of the Cleveland Conven­
tion demonstrate:
Whereas, for years the Colored
People of the United States have been
looking, hoping and waiting in expec­
tation of realizing the blessings of Civil
Liberty; and Whereas, during this long,
tedious and anxious period, they have
been depending upon their white fellowcountrymen to effect for them this
desirable end but instead of which they
have met with disappointment, dis­
couragement and degradation.
__________ To Be Continued

socialism as the road to true woman’s
liberation. That women suffer double
oppression (class <& sex) and third world
face triple oppression (class, nationality
& sex). The success of the proletarian
revolution depends to a great degree on
the extent to which women take part in
it. We also support the call to struggle
against revisionism, the main danger,
and to attack and expose bourgeois
feminism. Struggle for the democratic
rights of women, keeping in mind that in
struggling for these demands we always
bring to the forefront the fact that real
equality for women will not be won by
winning these particular demands. But
through Socialist revolution we will be
able to do a more indepth analysis of
LPR s line once RCL’s position has
been completed.
Our position on LPR at the present
time is that we still feel that they are
genuine, although we have differences in
line we feel that we can carry on lines
struggles with them so that the correct
line will win out.
LPR once denied, but now openly &
fully embraces the line reminiscent of
the left in form right essence “Wing” &
Liu Shao-Chi line “the masses are
backward”. Even tho Lenin stated the
masses are lower strata, this was a des­
cription of the economic level not/
political consciousness. Backward and
lower strata do not mean the same
things as LPR and the Wing incorrectly
a?Sert’ ^Hd even applying Lenin’s
characterization of the Russian Masses
in 1898 in the most backward country in
Europe,
mechanically and
automatically to 1977 in the most ad­
vanced monopoly capitalist country in
the world is not correct. The lower strata
workers were those to whom a socialist
newspaper was “completely or well nigh
incomprehensible to them”. Given the
advanced state of the productive forces,
we would question whether in the U.S.
today the largest masses of workers
would find a communist newspaper
completely or well nigh incomprehen­
sible to them”. The masses of Russian
workers in Lenin’s day were illiterate,
Russia not even a bourgeois democracy.
But these conditions that produced the
makeup of the U.S. working class must
be studied practically before we come to
a conclusion! And the LPR “lazy bones
approach” merely repeating Lenin, and
incorrectly at that, will not do.

Unity & Struggle

May Day
(Continued from page 12)
portunism. “The fight against imper­
ialism is a sham and a humbug unless it
tie or no wage increases, inflation, cut­
is inseparable bound up with the fight
backs in their children’s education and
against opportunism.” (V.l. Lennin,
daycare facilities, closing of their hos­
IMPERIALISM, THE HIGHEST
pitals, are all bourgeois attempts to shift
STAGE OF CAPITALISM) We must
the brunt of the economic crisis onto the
wage an unrelenting struggle to expose
backs of the working class, while cap­
and isolate the revisionists and op­
italists squander superprofits, stolen
portunists who are willing to settle for
principally from the third world and
short term goals while selling out the
from the oppressed nationalities of the
long range struggles of the working
U.S. multinational working class. These
class. We must expose and isolate the
superprofits are used to bribe the
opportunists who infiltrate the ranks of
apologizers of U.S. capitalism and
the working class to confuse and
imperialism - a section of the upper
mislead the struggle. Revisionists like
strata of the working class and petty
Angela Davis and the “Communist Par­
bourgeoisie - the labor aristocrats and
ty” U.S.A., who try to tie the U.S. wor­
trade union bureaucrats: Woodcock,
king class to the social-imperialist
who went to Viet Nam for smiling J.C.
representing U.S. imperialism, No­ “CP”SU. Or the “Revolutionary Com­
munist Party” who supports the social
Strike Abel - sell out of the steel
props of the bourgeoisie like Sadlowski,
workers; Sadlowski - liberal bandaid for
in an attempt to mislead and confuse the
a dying system; McBride - the 77 model
working class, and who liquidate the
right wing steel bureaucrat; Meany right of the self-determination of the
notorious old time lackey of the bour­
Afro-American nation with their
geoisie and carrier of the Gompers
revisionist line of “Nation of a New
lackey banner; and, Fitzsimmons who
Type,” actually denying the existence of
smelled so much like horse—that even
the Afro-American Nation, in the Black
the bourgeoisie had begun to clean the
Belt South. Or the October League
stables.
_
.
whose white chauvinism leads them to
Imperialism enslaves whole nations
sell out the struggles of the Afroand peoples and bleeds them of their
American people and objectively
resources and labor. Imperialism bullies
obstructs the unity of the multi-national
and threatens other countries.
working class. And whose opportunist
Imperialism bribes part of the upper
“party building” schemes try to stop the
strata of the working class with super­
workers struggle by throwing together
profits gotten from super-exploiting the
an opportunist social-democratic party
third world. Imperialism must search
to
mislead the working class, (for more
the world for new places to exploit and
info,
see RCL on Party Building) The
plunder, and must eventually fight wars
working class has no use for these op­
of aggression to redivide the world
portunists who would confine the
among the biggest imperialist powers.
struggle
to petty reforms, nor does the
Imperialism means war says Lenin. This
working class have use for the “left" op­
characterizes the struggle of imperialism
portunist line pushed by PRRWOvs. imperialism and are the laws that
RWL (a dangerous duo) who state that
govern the economic systems of both
involvement
in the struggles of the wor­
U.S. Imperialism and Soviet Social-imking class against capitalism is bowing
perialism. Imperialism takes the con­
to spontaneity-objectively negating
tradictions in capitalism to the P°Jnt
communist
leadership in the working
beyond which revolution begins. And it
class. Our struggle for reforms must be
is precisely the revolutionary struggles
seen in the context of revolution, of
against imperialism that is the main
preparing
the working class to smash by
trend in the world today. The highest ex­
force
the
U.S. bourgeois state, seize
pression of the struggle for hegemony
state power and build a socialist country
amongst capitalists is the superpower
under'the dictatorship of the pro­
contention between U.S. Imperialism
letariat - the working class, leading to
and Soviet Social-Imperialism. It is
the eventual emergence of communism primarily from these two superpowers
classless society.
that the danger of world war comes. T e
We must rid our ranks of these op­
main source of war comes from Socialportunists and their bourgeois ideas, if
Imperialist Soviet Union, who is the
we are to succeed.
most aggressive imperialist since it is the
The struggle of the working class
latecomer to the feast of parasites, they
must be organized in order to win
must take what the U.S. imperialists
against a well entrenched enemy - the
now dominate through imperialist war,
bourgeoisie, the capitalist class. It must
i.e. witness their bloody intervention in
be organized into a unified and powerful
Angola and Zaire.
army of all nationalities. The working
Imperialism is also opposed to the
class must have its own vanguard, its
socialist countries which is the
own political party to organize and lead
diction between fundamentally different
every stage and every aspect of the wor­
social systems: s0Cia‘lsI". nanbdet^en
king class struggle.lt needs a political
italism In the contradiction between
party composed of the best and most ad­
vanced elements of the working class. It
the socialist countries are the iryests
needs a Revolutionary Marxist-Leninist
table force on the rise, while imperialism
Communist Party based on Marxismsuffers defeat after defeat with each pas­
Leninism-Mao Tsetung Thought, the
sing day, as it suffers the doom of those
science of revolution.
reactionary forces who attempt to stop
The U.S. working class has needed
the dynamic advance of the wheel of h
such a party since 1957 when the
tOBut imperialism and social­
“CP”USA sold out the struggles of the
working class, revised the principles of
imperialism are hated all over the world^
Marxism-Leninism, and cut out its
People the world over are engaged in
revolutionary essence: class struggle, the
revolutionary struggles to destroy them
leading role of the Marxist-Leninist par­
and the leading force in making
ty, armed revolution and the dictator­
revolution is the third world, the people
ship of the proletariat.
of Asia, Africa and Latin America and
The central task of Marxist-Leninists
other regions. It is the: proletgr^n interand all advanced forces in the U.S. to­
nationalist duty of the U.S. work g
class to support the just struggles of the day - to build the party of the working
class, the party that can organize and
third world peoples against imperialism.
unite the struggles of the working class
These are the two sharpest trends in
and oppressed peoples into a broad
the world, war and revolution. And
front against imperialism - a party that
revolution is the main trend;
The struggles of the U.S. working can organize and lead the armed
class and oppresKd nal.nnal.fes are struggle of the working class and op­
pressed peoples to smash the capitalist
state and seize state power.
The struggle over the correct political
line, which is the key link at this stage of
X“a or w.; Will bring revolutron"
party building, is an ideological
StBPu> the slruggle ot.he working,cto struggle. The question of political line as
key link must be grasped in order to
aoainst imperialism will not be
successful without a struggle against op­ push forward the development of a

___________________________ Page 5

program (i.e., maximum and minimum
program and strategy and tactics for
carrying them out) around which
genuine Marxist-Leninists through
ideological struggle can demarcate
themselves from the opportunists and
therefore principly unite. The polemics
around political line must be aimed at
the program, and this struggle must be
carried out in front of and with the part­
icipation of the advanced, so as to carry
out our two simultaneous tactics of
party building, Marxist-Leninists Unite
- Win the Advanced to Communism.
And it is in this struggle over political
line that our practice of proletarian
ideology is confirmed.
The question of building the party of
the working class is the central question
at this time that faces the working class,
it is the central task that must be ac­
complished to move our struggle closer
to victory. And this question must
become a mass question gripping every
class conscious worker in the factory
and mill, every working class com­
munity, every working class organ­
ization and every person who wants to
end this system of oppression and ex­
ploitation.
This is the task before us on May Day
1977!
LONG LIVE THE FIRST OF MAY!
WORKERS
AND OPPRESSED
NATIONS AND PEOPLES UNITE!
MARXIST-LENINIST
UNITE­
WIN THE ADVANCED TO COMMUNISM!
BUILD
A
REVOLUTIONARY MARXISTLENINIST COMMUNIST PARTY
IN THE U.S.A. BASED ON
MARXISM-LENINISM-MAO
TSETUNG THOUGHT TO SMASH
CAPITALISM
AND BUILD
SOCIALISM AND THE DIC­
TATORSHIP
OF
THE
PROLETARIAT!

Long Live Karl Marx! Lenin said,
“Marxism is the system of the views and
teachings of Marx.” “The remarkable
consistency and integrity of Marx’s
views, acknowledged even by his op­
ponents, views which in their totality
constitute modern materialism and
modern scientific socialism. . are the
strong foundation for the science of
revolution today, Marxism-LeninismMao Tsetung Thought.
"Disco Turns
Revolutionary”

Hear dynamite new group

The
Advanced Workers
with The Anti-Imperialist
Singers
Music By:
Jio Williams &
Winston Sims
Lyrics Bv: Amiri Baraka
45 RPM:
“Better Red Let Others Be Dead”
plus
“You was Dancin’ need Ta Be Mar­
chin. .
$1.25 plus postage

To: People's War
Box 663
Newark, NJ,

REVOLUTIONARY
REVIEW:

Stalin Was A Great
Marxist-Leninist
Reprinted from
Albania Today

“Zeri I Popullit”, organ of the C.C. of
the P.L.A.
The stand towards Stalin has been
and still is a question of fundamental
principle, a very clear-cut political and
ideological line. Both now and in the
future, this remains one of the main lines
of demarcation dividing the genuine
Marxist-Leninists and revolutionaries
from the revisionists of every hue, divid­
ing the progressive forces from the reac­
tionary forces.
Year after year, the imperialists, the
fascist, and the revisionists have
invented all sorts of slanders about the
figure and work of Stalin, in the hope
that they will be able to revise history
and make mankind forget the truth. But
the place Stalin occupies in history is so
lofty and unassailable that the bour­
geois-revisionist scum are quite unable
to sully him.
The figure of Joseph Vissarionovich
Stalin is that of a great revolutionary
and Marxist-Leninist. Stalin is the faith­
ful pupil and successor who carried
onward and further developed the
thought and work of Lenin. Together
with Lenin, he laid the foundations for
and built the first socialist state in the
world. For thirty years on end, Stalin
successfully led the communist party of
the Soviet Union and the Soviet
proletarian state in the great battles of
socialist construction according to
Lenin’s teaching and the Leninist
norms, Stalin was the glorious leader of
the Soviet people and the Soviet army in
the great patriotic war which led to the
destruction of German fascism and
which made that priceless contribution
to the liberation of the peoples of
Europe and the world. U nder the leader­
ship of Stalin, within a short period and
without the material aid of anybody
else, the Soviet people healed the
wounds of the war, reconstructed the
economy and created the necessary
basis for the further development of in­
dustry, science, etc.
As a principled and consistent
revolutionary and internationalist,
Stalin worked for the promotion and
strengthening of the international
movements, both in the time of the
Comintern and afterwards. After World
War II, it was he who inspired the
creation of the Information Bureau,
which, as long as it existed, acted with
wisdom for the exchange of experience
among the sister communist and
workers parties on a revolutionary
internationalist basis. Time has com­
pletely confirmed the correct decisions it
adopted. The Party of Labour of
Albania has frequently spoken out and
has always heartly defended Stalin and
his work from the attacks and slanders
of Khruschov, the Khruschovites and all
the anti-communists. It is proud of hav­
ing done this. It will rise again and speak
out forcefully against the reactionary
bourgeoisie and the revisionists who at­
tack Stalin in order to fight the revolu­
tion and the ideas of communism.
There are people and revisionist par­
ties that, whenever they are faced with
internal difficulties or want to gain
capital in the eyes of the bourgeoisie and
imperialism, reactivate the old bankrupt
propaganda arsenal and begin to
slander Stalin. It has already been
proved that the anti-Stalin campaign of
these parties has been associated with or
has been a consequence of their further
opportunist degeneration, of the growth
of the chauvinist spirit and the domestic
affairs of others. In order to defend their
bankrupt cause, a number of individuals
(Continued on page 8)

Unity & Struggle

Page 6

BUILD A REVOLUTIONARY MARXIST-LENINIST COMMUNIST PA
(Continued from page 1)
ing contrasting or differing aspects (or
tasks) of the process which are more
pronounced at one point (or stage) than
that which preceded it or follows it.
Comrade Dimitroff put it this way,
“These main periods in the party’s his­
tory naturally have their own stages of
development.” (Sei. Works, Vol. 3,
p.269, Sofia Press). Why is this im­
portant to see this in Party Building?
Because, ‘Tf people do not pay attention
to the stages in the process of
development of a thing, they cannot
deal with its contradictions properly.”
(Mao Tsetung, 4 Essays on Philosophy),
pg. 43). Marxism - Leninism - Mao
Tsetung Thought clearly lays this out
and the experience of the proletariat in
party building confirms that we must
understand the period and stage we are
in, in order to understand the historical
tasks that we must accomplish in mak­
ing proletarian revolution in the U.S.
Periods and Stages
1st stage of pre-party, party building
period: key link affirmation of theory
and ideology of M-L-M.

We hold that this is the second stage
of the pre-party, party building period.
The 1st stage emerged from the eclec­
ticism which had gripped many ad­
vanced forces that arose in the fifties &
sixties, and the key link in this 1st stage
was the affirmation of the theory and
ideology of M-L-M. This means that the
advanced forces that emerged in the
upheavals of the 60’s, looking for a
revolutionary theory to answer the
problems posed by the revolutionary
struggles of the masses, turned to the
writings of Malcolm X, Fanon,
Guevara, Mirighela, Nkrumah, Debray,
Nyerere, Toure’, Castro, Karenga and
others.** This turns to eclecticism in
search of a revolutionary MarxistLeninist Communist Party in the U.S.
to bring the science of revolution, Marx­
ism-Leninism - Mao Tsetung Thought,
to the spontaneous working class
movement, because of the criminal bet­
rayal of the “CP” USA. There were 2
major party building attempts in the 1st
stage, the Provisional Organizing Com­
mittee (P.O.C.) first in 1958 which
criticized the revisionism of the
“CP”USA, but later sunk into the
quicksand of bourgeois ideology itself
with a consolidated “left” opportunist
line. The 2nd attempt was made in 1962.
Progressive Labor arose as the Progres­
sive Labor Movement, later to declare
itself the Progressive Labor Party in
1965. PL played a positive role at the
outset, criticizing Soviet revisionism,
but PL also sunk into the bog of op­
portunism. PL lines up with Liu Shaochi against the Proletarian Cultural
Revolution initiated by Mao Tsetung in
China, and they began to take a con­
sistent counterrevolutionary chauvinist
line against oppressed nationalities in
the U.S.
But clearly from the experiences of
advanced forces in the 60’s what was
necessary was to break with the eclec­
ticism, and affirm the theory and
ideology of M-L-M. In summing up
these periods and stages one for­
mulation is an obstacle in understan­
ding the periods and stages in party
bldg, in the U.S.
We say that the key link in the 1st
stage was the affirmation of the theory
and ideology of M-L-M, because of the
vagueness and misuse of the for­
mulation “1st stage was when ideology
was key link”, and we say this for­
mulation some comrades are using, is an
obstacle to a clear understanding of the
stage we are in now. Because it tends to
lead to the misunderstanding that the
struggle for correct political line is not
an ideological task, just as in the next
stage in which organizational tasks of
party building will be key, ideological
struggles over those tasks will play a
crucial part of the completion of those
** SEE JUNE EDITION OF UNITY &
STRUGGLE CRITICISM OF
KAWAIDA

tasks. Theory is the summed up ex­
perience of the working class movement
taken in its general aspect and as put
forward chiefly by 5 Great Teachers Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin and Mao.
By ideology (though at times these are
used interchangeably) we mean the
stand, worldview and methodology of
the proletariat, i.e., dialectical and his­
torical materialism. But the practice of
the Dangerous Duo shows that the for­
mulation “ideology was the key link” is
an obstacle, because they use this for­
mulation to liquidate the ideological
tasks of this stage, and to misunderstand
the role of ideology generally.
The struggle over the correct political
line, which is the key link at this stage in
party building, is an ideological
struggle, and there are ideological tasks
throughout the life of the party. To li­
quidate the importance of building the
party on the ideological plane would
sabotage the ideological & political
foundations of the party we struggle to
build, because to the degree we belittle
proletarian ideology, we open the door
wide to revisionism and bourgeois
ideology.

Uniting Marxist-Leninists,
Winning The Advanced To
THE SIAMESE TWWS OF P
Communism
The two simultaneous tactics of Party
Building are Uniting Marxist-Leninists
and Willing the Advanced to Com­
munism.
One of these aspects must pay the
leading role and give this simultaneous
task its character and the conscious
element (the Marxist-Leninists) must, in
order to win the Advanced, that is, make
the Advanced communists, take the
leading role - “Marxist-Leninists
Unite!” therefore is principal. This
aspect, the principal aspect, is the
catalyst that makes the entire process
work, and while the Marxist-Leninists
unite, simultaneously the Advanced are
won to Communism. In order to win the
Advanced to Communism it must be the
Marxist-Leninists who bring the science
WILLIH&'P*
of M-L-M into the workers movement
FIGtfT&CK!
causing the fusion. The workers
movement is spontaneous and not based
....
on the science of proletarian revolution.
This is the job of the communists (the
Within the process of Party Building
Revolutionary theoreticians) to in­
the fundamental contradiction is fusion
troduce the science of M-L-M, the
of the communist movement with the
♦ ♦ ♦
science that will lead the proletariat
working class movement. There are two
The question of political line as the under the leadership of a communist
aspects of each of these separate con­
key link must push forward the vanguard party to victory in armed
tradictions. In the communist
development of a program (i.e., max­ struggle to overthrow the bourgeois
movement it is (1) Marxist-Leninist
imum and minimum program and state.
Unity vs (2) Marxist-Leninist Disunity
strategy and tactics for carrying them
The working class movement does
and in the workers’ movement it is (1)
out) around which genuine Marxists- gravitate towards socialism; but scien­
the fusion with M-L-M vs (2) the spon­
Leninists, through ideological struggle, tific socialism is brought to the workers
taneity of the working class without Mcan demarcate themselves from the op­ from the outside because the spon­
L-M.
portunists and therefore principly unite. taneous movement of the workers also
At present, the state of the Com­
The polemics around political line must gravitates more toward bourgeois
munist Movement is marked by Marx­
be aimed at the program, and it is in this ideology which is what keeps the wor­
ist-Leninist disunity, the Workers
struggle over political line that our prac­ king class from the science of MarxismMovement by spontaneity, these are the
tice of proletarian ideology is con­ Leninism-Mao Tse Tung Thought.
principal aspects of these con­
firmed. But we must not deal with “The working class spontaneously
tradictions. But if we are to build the
polemics in the abstract, they must be gravitates towards Socialism, but the
party and make revolution. Com­
aimed at a program so that in the more widespread (and continuously
munists must struggle to transform the
ideological struggle over political line revived in the most diverse forms)
principal aspects of these contradictions
that is key in this stage, the scattered bourgeois ideology nevertheless spon­
to Marxist-Leninist unity and fusion of
political lines on the burning questions taneously imposes itself upon the wor­
Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tse Tung
of proletarian revolution in the U.S. king class still more.” (Lenin, What Is
Thought with the spontaneous workers’
must be forged into a party program To Be Done, pg. 51) Stalin raised in
movement, i.e. winning the advanced to
through ideological struggle in relationship as to how the science would
communism.
propaganda, forums, joint theoretical be brought into the working class
Until the science of M-L-M is fused
and
practical work, exchanging movement: “Here is what Marx and
with the working class movement the
theoretical materials and waging the Engels say in their Manifesto: ‘The
proletariat does not see that their aim is
theoretical and practical form of class Communists (i.e. Social Democrats),...
the overthrow of capitalism and that
struggle to achieve a correct and com­ are on the one hand, practically, the
“their conquest of political power (dic­
prehensive system of views - that is a most advanced and resolute section of
tatorship of the proletariat)” is the vital
system of answers to the revolutionary the working class parties of every coun­
“means of achieving the victory of
struggle, which Marxist-Leninists and try, that section which pushes forward
socialism.” The proletariat fights but
advanced unite around and also upon all others; on the other hand,
their consciousness, “exclusively by its
which a party organization can be theoretically, they have over the great
own efforts” is not Marxist-Leninist but
formed.
mass of the proletariat the advantage of
mainly trade unionist, and their fighting
And in the process of ideological clearly understanding the line of march,
is divided. However, when the Marxiststruggle over the correct political line, the conditions, and the ultimate general
Leninists bring the science of M-L-M
we can demarcate the genuine from the results of the proletarian movement!
into the workers’ movement, the
sham. We must sum up the results of our Yes, the ideologists ‘push forward’, they
proletariat begins to understand the
own, as well as others’, practice in see much farther than the great mass of
need for a proletarian revolution and
polemics that promote genuine unity the proletariat, and this is the whole
the establishment of the dictatorship of
based on sharp lines of demarcation, point ” (Stalin Works, Vol. 1, pgs. 64the proletariat. Therefore, it is the duty
analyzing the correctness of the political 65) This sums up very clearly why
of the Marxist-Leninists to unite to fuse
line measured by the concrete practice in is necessary to fuse the science of M-Lthe science of M-L-M with the working
the crucible of class struggle and how it M with the workers’ movement, why the
class movement, to imbue the workers
corresponds with the theory & ideology Marxist-Leninists must take the leading
movement
with
Marxist-Leninist
of M-L-M, that is to say, we must unite role in this fusion in relationship to the
consciousness and thereby give the
M-L-M with the concrete practice of process of party building, the role of the
spontaneous working-class movement a
proletarian revolution in the U.S. Lenin party as well as the party’s composition.
concious character.
says that “. . . if the polemic is not to be
fruitless, if it is not to degenerate into
presonal rivalry, if it is not to lead to a
confusion of views, to a confounding of
- - i
enemies and friends, it is absolutely
essential that the question of the
programme be introduced into the
polemic. The polemic will be of benefit
We carry the works of:
MARX
only if it makes clear in what differences
ENGELS
of substance or differences on partial
LENIN
questions, whether or not these
OPEN MONDAY THRU FRIDAY
STALIN
1:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M.
differences interfere with common work
MAO TSE TUNG
ENVER HOXHA
in the ranks of one and the same party,
IN ENGLISH AND SPANISH
,
only the introduction of the programme
ALL AT THE LOWEST PRICES IN TOWN!
Books and Magazines from
question into the polemic, only a
Ask for our catalog
_ _
Peoples Republic of China and Albania
definite statement by the 2 polemicizing
AVAILABLE:
parties on the programmatic views, can
A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social Democracy .50
provide an answer to all tnese questions,
J. V. Stalin: A Short Biography-1950 Edition
questions that insistently demand an
2.00
Analysis of Havana Conference
.25
answer.” (Lenin, “Draft Programme of
The Puerto Rican National Question
.50
Collected Works of Lenin
Our Party,” LCW, Vol. 4, pp. 230-31).
75.00
and
many
others
Political line is the key link at this
When ordering Books include postage and handling
stage in the pre-party period, which we
must firmly grasp to propel the
On Strategy and Tactics - Stalin
revolutionary motion toward the build­
1.00
ing of the party forward.

10^ Street Booksh
224 East 10th Street N.Y.,10003,N.V
.......

tel. 473-8736

Unity & Struggle

Page 7

FY BASED ON MARXISM- LENINISM-MAO TSETUNG THOUGHT!
VUT1CAL BANKRUPTCY
. /NOTHIN Or AT ALL-

----------- J

HD

F/RST PARTY ^CONGRESS
ADVANCED WORKER
In A Retrograde Trend in Russian
Social Democracy, Lenin lays out the
definition of what an advanced worker
is. We agree with his definition and
think that the essence of this definition
applies in the U.S. today, and that the
better situated strata of the working
class responds to socialism more rapidly
and this is true today. Lenin specifically
said: “The history of the working class
movement in all countries shows that
the better-situated strata of the working
class respond to the ideas of socialism
more rapidly and more easily.” (A Ret­
rograde Trend in Russian Social
Democracy, pg. 26) By advanced
worker we mean “those who can win the
confidence of the laboring masses, who
devote themselves entirely to the
education and organization of the
proletariat, who accept socialism conciously and who even elaborate
independent socialist theories . . .
workers, who despite their wretched liv­
ing conditions, despite the stultifying
penal servitude of factory labor possess
so much character and will power that
they study, study, study, and turn
themselves into conscious social­
democrats - the working class
intelligentsia.” (Ibid, pg. 26-27). We
think that this definition should be
studied and used as a guide by Marxist^
Leninists and advanced forces in ap­
plying this to the concrete conditions to­
day in the U.S.A.
The conditions which produce the ad­
vanced worker in the United States are
not exactly the same as during Lenin’s
time. Stalin pointed out, “the new
productice forces require that the
workers in production shall be better
educated and more intelligent than the
downtrodden and ignorant serfs, that
they be able to understand machinery
and operate it properly.” (History of
CPSU(B), pg. 125)
Imperialism is
the highest stage of capitalism. Based on
these concrete conditions with the

development of the productive forces
have resulted in a broader strata of
“better situated workers” and therefore,
despite a huge level of opportunism in
the U.S., more advanced workers more
advanced numerically and more ad­
vanced workers in the sense that the
level of the productive forces today re­
quire that the worker be more educated,
and at a higher level of consciousness
“to operate the machinery properly.”
But on the other hand fusion in the
U.S. is at a low level between the com­
munist movement and workers’
movement because there has been no
genuine communist party since 1957,
and due to the high level of opportunism
based on superprofits imperialism gets
from the exploitation of Asia, Africa
and Latin America and oppressed
nationalities inside this country, which
makes it possible for imperialism to
bribe a small sector of the working class
in the U.S. and gives concessions to
others. Opportunism exists to such a
high level that the “CP”USA has
degenerated into revisionism. The spon­
taneous working class movement is
“led” by a large number of bribed
elements such as the labor aristocrats,
revisionists, as well as economists and
other social props of the bourgeoisie
because there’s no vanguard MarxistLeninist party to introduce scientific
socialism into the working class
movement.
The advanced worker is class
conscious, politically active, can win the
the confidence & trust of the masses,
educate and organize the proletariat,
studying and actively seeking answers to
questions thrown up by the movement
and society, and once socialism is laid
out to them they will consciously accept
it, and will become a communist based
on their contact with M-L-M and their
active study to turn themselves into
Communitsts.
Lenin pointed out that “everywhere
and at all times the leaders of a certain
class have always been its advanced”,
and this is true here also because the
workers’ struggles in the 60’s, the black
liberation movement, the anti-war
movement, each brought forth such ex­
amples of advanced workers. In this
stage of the pre-party period when
political line is the key link we must aim
our propaganda & agitation mainly at
the advanced who are located in large
scale industries and who are part of the
spontaneous working class movement,
and begin to do necessary concrete
analysis to see what workers are ad­
vanced based on applying the essence of
Lenin’s definition to our contrete con­
ditions in the U.S.A, as well as workers
response to the analysis put forward in
our propaganda, questions that the
workers raise about our propaganda
and the lines they put forward, and
begin to select advanced workers that
can be pulled into study circles and
developing factory nuclei.
FUSION
“In every country there has been a
period in which the workingclass

NEW DEVELOPMENTS
IN CHINA'S COUNTRYSIDE:

Inside A People's Commune.......................... $ 1.25
p Report from Tungting.................................... $ .50
P Philosophy is No Mystery.............................. $ .50
p Serving the People with Dialectics................ $ .50
P A Young Pathbreaker....................................... $1.00
P0n the Question of Agricult. Cooperation, Mao
$ .25
P Report of an Investigation into the Peasant Move­
ment in Hunan (1927).............................. $ .35
P Iron Oxen, by William Hinton......................... $1.95
P A Year in Upper Felicity, Jack Chen.............. $8.95
p Subscription to China Reconstructs........ $3/year;
$4.50/2 years; $6/3 years.
2929 - 24th Street, San Francisco CA 94110
125 Fifth Avenue. New York NV 10003
210 W Madison Street. Chicago IL 60606

CHINA BOOKS
& PERIODICALS. INC.
Name--------—

Address-------City.--------------

State------------

_____ Zip

Date-—--------- ——
Payment in full including tax $------------------------------

Free catalog of books, magazines, posters, greet
mo cards, records, etc.

movement existed apart from socialism,
each going its own way; and in every
country this isolation has weakened
both socialism and the working class
movement. Only the fusion of socialism
with the working class movement has in
all countries created a durable basis for
both. But in every country, this com­
bination of socialism and the working­
class movement was evolved his­
torically, in unique ways, in accordance
with the prevailing conditions of time
and place (our emphasis), in Russia, the
necessity for combining socialism and
the working-class movement was in
theory long ago proclaimed but it is only
now being carried into practice. It is a
very difficult process and there is
therefore nothing surprising in the fact
that it is accompanied by vacillations
and doubts.” (Lenin, Party Work in the
Masses, pg. 9)
During the revolutionary life of the
CPUSA, socialism was being brought to
the workers movement in the factories,
trade unions, and to mass
organizations. But fusion in the U.S.
was turned around almost to a standstill
because ofthe betrayal of the “CP” USA
with its consolidation of revisionism in
1957. The U.S. proletariat has been
without its vanguard, the conscious
element in fusion, to guide the spon­
taneous workers’ struggles to conscious
class struggle and victory. Therefore
fusion in the U.S. is low.
Without a genuine Marxist-Leninist
Communist Party the working-class
movement in its struggle against
monopoly capitalism is spontaneous
and “led” by economists, revisionists
and other bourgeois social props, it
lacks the science to turn its struggle into
a powerful movement to violently over­
throw the bourgeois state and establish
the dictatorship of the proletariat.
“When this fusion takes place the
class struggle of the workers becomes
the conscious struggle of the proletariat
to emancipate itself from exploitation
by the propertied classes, it is evolved
into a higher form of the socialist
workers’ movement, the independent
working class Social Democratic Party.
By directing socialism towards a fusion
with the working class movement, Karl
Marx and Frederick Engels did their
greatest service. They created a
revolutionary theory that explained the
necessity for this fusion and gave
socialists the task of organizing the class
struggle of the proletariat.” (Lenin, Ret­
rograde Trend in Russian Social
Democracy, p. 3)
The concrete conditions in the U.S.
show that the communist movement is
separated from the working class
movement. Because the proletariat has
lost its vanguard, its communist party,
the U.S. working class movement and
scientific socialism are separated.
Lenin waged poletnics against the
economists who said that all was needed
was the economic struggle - strikes and
trade unions. Economist belittle the in­
troduction of the conscious element into
the working class movement. Lenin
said, “Hence, our task, the task of Social
Democracy, is to combat spontaniety,
to divert the working-class movement
from this spontaneous trade-unionist
striving to come under the wing of
revolutionary
Social-Democracy ”
Lenin, What Is To Be Done, pg. 49).
Comrade Stalin in the pamphlet
Briefly About the Disagreements in the
Party, sums up the views of the Lenin
wing of Social-Democracy on the sub­
ject of fusion as follows: ’What is scien­
tific socialism without the labour
movement? A compass which, if left
unused, can only grow rusty and then
has to be thrown overboard. What is the
labour movement without socialism? A
ship without a compass which will reach
the other shore in any case, but would
reach it much sooner and with less
danger if it had a compass.
“Unite the two and you will get a
splendid vessel, which will speed
straight towards the other shore and
reach a haven unharmed. Unite the
labor movement with socialism and you

will get a social democratic movement
which will speed straight towards the
‘promise land.’The whole history of the
working class struggle in Russia has
brilliantly confirmed the important
theoretical conclusion of Comrade
Stalin’s. In the pamphlet in question
Stalin subjected the opportunist theory
of Spontaniety to withering criticism
and gave a reasoned explanation of the
role and significance of a revolutionary
party and of revolutionary theory for
the working class. ‘The labour
movement’ wrote Stalin, ‘must be united
with socialism; practical activities and
theoretical thought must merge into one
and thereby lend the spontaneous
labour movement a Social Democratic
character . . . Our duty, the duty of
Social Democracy is to direct the spon­
taneous labour movement from the path
of narrow trade unionism to the Social
Democratic path. Our duty is to in­
troduce socialist consciousness into this
movement and unite the advanced
forces of the working class in one cen­
tralized party. Our task is always to be at
the head of the movement and tirelessly
combat all those - foes or ‘friends’ who
hinder the accomplishment of this task.”
(Biography of Joseph Stalin, p. 14-15).
The building of the vanguard com­
munist party is the “biggest step forward
towards this fusion”, (Retrograde Trend
in Russian Social Democracy, pg. 4)
and fusion continues throughout the en­
tire life of the Communist Party.
Our concrete conditions in the U.S.A,
dictate for genuine Marxist-Leninists
and advanced forces to strengthen this
fusion and build the Revolutionary
Marxist-Leninist Communist Party, the
“highest form of class organization of
the proletariat.”
Propaganda, The Chief
Form of Activity
Propaganda is the chief form of ac­
tivity in the pre-party period, the period
in which party building is the central
task. And this propaganda must prin­
cipally unite Marxist-Leninists and Win
the Advanced to Communism.
Propaganda is the means by which the
teachings of scientific socialism are
spread among the masses. The
propaganda piece contains within it
many ideas so that the particular topic
can be understood in its totality. In his
pamphlet, The Tasks of the Russian
Social-Democrats, Lenin describes the
content and character of communist
propaganda and what the aim of com­
munist propaganda is:
“The socialist activities of Russian
Social Democrats consists in spreading
by propaganda the teachings of scien­
tific socialism, in spreading among the
workers a proper understanding of the
present social and economic system, its
basis and its development, and
understanding of the various classes in
Russian society, of their interrelations
of the struggle between these classes, of
the role of the working class in this
struggle, of its attitude towards the
declining and the developing classes,
towards the past and the future of
capitalism, and understanding of the
historical task of international SocialDemocracy and of the Russian working
class ...” (Lenin, Collected Works, Vol.
2. p. 239, Progress Pub.)
There are different ways of spreading
communist propaganda, but the Com­
munist International guided us to the
chief forms of propaganda, which they
laid out in 1921 from their 3rd Congress:
(i) Individual verbal propaganda
(ii) Participation in the industrial and
political labor movement.
(iii) Propaganda through the party
press and distribution of literature.
Every member of a legal or illegal Party
is to participate regularly in one or the
other of these forms of propaganda.”
(C.L Resolutions on “Principles of
Party Organization” 1921, pg. 16)
The Communist International put
verbal propaganda first, that is dis­
cussion with the workers, face to face (as
for instance the struggle over political
line in the presence of and with the par(Continued on page 8)

Page 8

Party
Building

(Continued from page 7)
ticipation of the advance). Second it
upholds the existence of Communists
working within the working class
movement, necessarily putting forth
communist lines on all issues, as the next
form of propaganda.
Next is printed party propaganda.
Too often we have a tendency to
downplay the first altogether (especially
non-verbal petty bourgeois intellectual
types) and also not understand that our
presence as communists within the wor­
king class movement is to teach i.e., br­
ing the science of M-L-M to the workers
in a concrete and practical way, and by
example.
Building study circles,
developing factory nuclei and leading
the spontaneous working class
movement are the practical and
organizational work that goes on even
while propaganda is the chief form of
activity.
Communist propaganda, whose aim
and objective is to educate, train and
raise the working class consciousness to
a revolutionary proletarian class level is
inseparable from the task of political ex­
posure and agitation. Agitation ex­
plains or presents a single idea for the
purpose of arousing political action,
and in the main these ideas are ex­
pressed through participation in
workers struggles, the living word, and
agitational
literature.
Communist
agitation must give a conscious
character to the spontaneous struggle of
the masses. To quote Lenin,
“Inseparably connected with
propaganda is agitation among the
workers.” “Agitation among the
workers means that the Social Democ­
rats take part in all the spontaneous
manifestations of the working class
struggle, in all the conflicts between the
workers and the capitalists over the wor­
king day, wages, working conditions,
etc. Our task is to merge our activities
with the practical everyday questions of
working class life, to help the workers to
understand these questions, to draw
workers’ attention to the most im­
portant abuses, to help them formulate
their demands to the employers more
precisely and practically, to develop
among the workers consciousness of
their solidarity, consciousness of the
common interest and common cause of
all the Russian workers as a united wor­
king class that is part of the inter­
national army of the proletariat . . .”
(Op. Cit. pg. 329) It is through
propaganda and agitation that the link
between
Marxism-Leninism- Mao
Tsetung Thought and the working class
movement is fused. Propaganda
without agitation becomes sterile,
because there exists no connection
between it and the day to day abuses of
working class life. Agitation without
propaganda becomes spontaneous,
because the total political significance of
the situation cannot be clearly
understood, so therefore the movement
lacks proper direction.
Clearly our propaganda must be
aimed at the advanced workers prin­
cipally, in the pre-party period, the

Unity & Struggle
materialism. But we see this key link as
period of the formation of the vanguard
an ideological task and we see that there
of the proletariat, i.e. winning the best
are also organizational tasks even at this
elements of the working class to the side
stage of the party building period such
of communism. This propaganda
as study circles, factory nuclei, fractions
should not lower its content to the level
in mass organizations.
of the non-class conscious worker, but
4- We also waged a polemic against
must constantly raise the level of
and tried to correct the vagueness and
consciousness of the advanced, and at
misuse of the term “the 1st period was
the same time raise the political
when ideology was key link”, because it
consciousness of the average and lower
tended to lead to a misunderstanding
strata of the working class.
that the struggle for correct political line
In our propaganda, the chief form of
was not an ideological task. Just as in
activity in this period when the party is
the next stage in which organizational
in formation, we must uphold Marxismtasks of party building will be key,
Leninism-Mao-Tsetung Thought in
ideological struggle over those tasks will
theory and in practice. And propaganda
play a crucial part of the completion of
must carry the struggle against right op­
those tasks.
portunism the main danger, (on the
We stressed that by theory we meant
right O.L. does no propaganda and trifl­
the summed up experience of the wor­
ing polemics) and its reverse side, “left”
king class movement taken in its general
sectarianism (the duo in upholding
aspect and as put forward chiefly by 5
propaganda as the chief form of activity
great teachers - Marx, Engels. Lenin.
liquidates all other forms of struggle).
Stalin and Mao. By ideology (though at
We must oppose every stripe of op­
times these are used interchangeably) we
portunism that attempts to obstruct the
meant the stand, worldview and
irrestible motion toward building the
methodology of the proletariat, i.e.,
Revolutionary Marxist-Leninist Com­
dialectical and historical materialism.
munist Party.
5. We pointed out how the question of
People of the World Unite to Smash
political line being key link had to fur­
U.S. Imperialism and U.S.S.R. Social
ther the development of a program [i.e.,
Imperialism - the 2 Superpowers!
maximum and minimum program and
Marxist-Leninists Unite - Win the
strategy and tactics for carrying them
Advanced to Communism!
out] around which genuine MarxistDefeat Right Opportunism, the Main
Leninists through ideological struggle
Danger - Intensify Struggle Against the
can demarcate themselves from the op­
“Left” Sectarian Deviation!
portunists and therefore principly unite.
Build a Revolutionary MarxistAnd
that one clear relationship of the
Leninist Communist Party Based On
dangerous O.L. party building motion
Marxism-Leninism-Mao Tsetung
which was programless, and the erratic
Thought!
“leftism” of the Duo was that neither
SUMMARY
had or gave priority to program!
L We began with the overall world
6. On the question of advanced
situation, outlining the four fun­
worker we held to the essence of Lenin’s
damental contradictions of imperialism,
definition of 1899 in Russia, but
the two sharpest contradictions which
paraphrased it thus: “one who is class
give rise to two rising trends, revolution
conscious, politically active, can win the
and war. We held that revolution is the
confidence and trust of the masses,
main trend in the world today and
educate and organize the proletariat,
Soviet Social Imperialism the main
studying and actively seeking answers to
source of war, though they try to cover
questions thrown up by the movement
their rapacious designs with the sign
and
society, consciously accept
board of “socialism” when capitalism
socialism and will become a communist
has been restored there, and with the
based on their contact with M-L-M and
bogus cry of “Detente”.
their active study to turn themselves into
2. That the central task of Marxist- Communists”.
Leninists and advanced forces in the
But at the same time we recognized
U.S. at present is party building, and has
the differences in concrete conditions
been since the historic tragic con­
between Lenin’s Russia and the degree
solidation to revisionism of the
of fusion between Revolutionary Marx­
CP USA in 1957. But party building is
ism and the spontaneous working class
the central task not the only task as the
movement at that time and in the U.S.
left sectarians hold. The main danger
today. We held that the productive
to the Communist and workers
forces of the U.S. had produced more
movements is revisionism and right op­
advanced workers but that because of
portunism, coming principally from
the absence of a genuine CP and the
USSR-“CP”SU revisionism in state
level of opportunism created by
power, and in the U.S.A., their 5th
imperialism and the scattered state of
column “CP”USA.
the anti-revisionist communist
That R“CP” and ‘C”L“P” are no
movement, fusion was low.
longer in the anti-revisionist communist
7. We held that the two most im­
movement, and main source of
portant tactical tasks of this period were
revisionisn in anti-revisionist com­
“Marxist-Leninists Unite - Win the Ad­
munist movement is O.L. who is rapidly
vanced to Communism”. We held that
consolidating to revisionism Marxist-Leninists unity versus Marxistmanifested clearly by its menshevik call
-Leninists disunity was the principal
for a party of the Martov type.
contradiction among a number of con­
Clearly we see the main danger as
tradictions in party building generally.
revisionism from the right, led by OL in
And that in the entity Marxist-Lenin­
the
anti-revisionist
communist
ists Unite - Win the Advanced to Com­
movement, but at the same time a rising
munism, the basic initiating form of
danger has been the “left” infantile sec­
fusion, which is a fundamental principle
tarianism of the Dangerous Duo of Communist parties, Marxist-Lenin­
PRRWO & RWL. Both of these lines
ists Unite was principal.
have been manifest inside our own
Marxist-Leninists unite was principal
organization, put forward in essentially
because it played the leading role, it was
menshevik, i.e., hidden and
the lever, the initiating factor and
underhanded methods, but we are
catalyst that made the entire process
struggling against “left” and right menMarxist-Leninists Unite - Win the Ad­
sheviks.
vanced to Communism happen
3. We held that this is the second stage simultaneously, (though we rejected the
equilibrium theory put out by the “left”
of the pre-party, party building period.
sectarians, or the separation of the tasks
The first being the stage emerging from
put out by the right.)
eclecticism, in which the affirmation of
8. We held that propaganda was the
the theory and ideology of M-L-M was
chief form of practical activity, in this
key: The second, the present stage, in
period, but that it was inseparable from
which the ideological struggle over the
agitation. And we put forward that we
correct political line, i.e., the application
recognize not merely written propagan­
of the theory of M-L-M to the concrete
da, but uphold all formsthat the C 1 put
conditions of proletarian revolution in
the U.S.A, is key, and by means of forward, i.e., 1. Verbal 2. Participate in
workers movement. 3. Written.
which we will be able to confirm
in general we raised struggle against
whether comrades are actually prac­
the main right danger and the rising
ticing M-L-M ideology, i.e., the stand,
“left” sectarian deviation. We tried also
viewpoint and methodology of the
to make self criticism.for the slowness.
proletariat, dialectical and historical

and right deviation of our practice
around taking clear positions on party
building.
During this period in which we put
together this paper, RCL (M-L-M) has
undergone extremely significant
changes. Not only the change from CAP
to RCL and what that implies and en­
tails, but because of intensified internal
struggle, we saw the crystallization of
certain Right lines (tailing O.L.) and
“Left” (tailing the Duo) tendencies
which have resulted in the ejection and
Hight of some opportunists and mensheviks. I his is a good thing, it is part of
the process of bolshevization, a for­
midable and lengthy process, involving
intensive study and training and
revolutionary practice and the remould­
ing of world view in the development of
a party which is “fully consolidated
ideologically,
politically,
and
organizationally” and comes not merely
by proclamation as some of our “instant
bolsheviks” seem to think.

Stalin Was
A Great
Marxist-Leninist
(Continued from page 5)
of this sort label their personal enemies,
or rivals for power, saboteurs and spies
in the pay of the Soviet social-imperial­
ists or of the U.S. imperialist as “Stalin­
ists
supporters of the Information
Bureau. ’ But this is a false appellation
because nowadays even children know
that the saboteurs and spies, the imperalists or the social imperialists have
nothing in common either with Stalin or
with the Information Bureau. But even
the fanciest patches can’t make tattered
clothing new, any more than sickness
can be cured with a magic wand.
In order to cover up the failures, in
their national policy, which is a typically
bourgeois nationalists policy, these
same individuals and revisionist parties
even reach the point of labelling some
nationality with all sorts of epithets, ac­
cusing them of “irridentism”, “Stalinist”
dogmatism, and so on. However means
of such falsehood and insinuations they
will not be able to cover up the injustices
that exist or extinguish people’s pure
and legitimate national feelings, nor will
they have the slightest effect on those
countries to which the modern revision­
ists seek to make allusions and to
damage the friendship between peoples.
Stalin was a great Marxist theoretic­
ian on the national question. If the
revisionists have forgotten this, let them
read Lenin properly and see how highly
he appraised the great theoretical and
practical importance of Stalin’s work on
the national question, let them recall the
struggle waged by Lenin in defense of
Stalin’s theses against the attacks of the
deviators and other enemies of the
revolution. (“On the National
Programme of R.S.D.L.P.”, Lenin,
Works, vol. 19). In writing about these
questions in defense of Stalin, our desire
is that the matter will be kept on the
ideological plane. However if the scrib­
blers and the defenders of anti-Marxist
theses on the national question aim at
persecuting the national minorities, they
may be sure that the Party of Labour of
Albania, on a Marxist-Leninist way,
will defend any people and national
minority which is oppressed and
persecuted by any one at all. This is a
revolutionary obligation and an inter­
nationalist duty from which no people
and no party fighting for socialism and
the.liberation of the peoples can turn
away.

Unity & Struggle

African Liberation Day
{Continued from page 3)
ning. True opportunism. So then they
show up at the Washington, D.C. meet­
ing claiming (after much petit-bour­
geois maneuvering and wriggling) they
would not support the ALSC demon­
stration and conference because it had
been decided by the “left bloc” and
should not be honored because it did not
“represent the true sentiment of the SC”
True opportunism.
In essence RWC was saying because we
had not voted the way the “majority
bloc” would have voted, then it is not
legitimate and should be used as an ex­
cuse to join a demonstration led by the
chauvinist “RCP”, who have liquidated
the Afro-American National Question
and who downplay national liberation
movements. The “RCP” has declared
themselves “the Party” based on sub­
jectivism, opportunism and white
chauvinism have objectively taken
themselves right out of the anti-revision­
ist Communist movement here in the
USA where genuine Marxist-Leninists
and advanced forces are still struggling
to build a real REVOLUTIONARY
MARXIST-LENINIST
COM­
MUNIST PARTY BASED ON
MARXISM-LENINISM-MAO TSETUNG THOUGHT. The “RCP” or OL
for that matter, does not meet the re­
quirements of the proletariat which
would give them legitimate right to call
themselves the “Party.” “RCP-’s
revisionist line on the Afro-American
National Question, talking about a
“nation of the new type” is one example
of their opportunism and is actually the
CPUSA turned inside out. Their line li­
quidates the Afro-American Nation in
the end, opposes self-determination,
talking the same doubletalk as OL, i.e.,
they support self-determination but op­
pose secession. If they oppose secession,
then they oppose self-determination,
since self-determination means nothing
if any of the Black Nation’s options are
removed. “RCP”s line that the “nation
has dispersed” is factually bankrupt and
an attempt to legitimize their op­
portunism and chauvinism.
So why is RWC allowing itself to be
used as a front organization for “RCP”
within ALSC? One reason for this is that
the RWC holds that “RCP” and the OL
are fraternal organizations because of
the general affirmation of the general
truths of Marxism-Leninism and im­
plies that they see the affirmation of the
theory and ideology of M-L-M as the
key link in this period of party building
instead of seeing ideological struggle
over the political line as the key link.
This right opportunist line leads the
RWC to make such unholy alliances
such as theirs with “RCP”. Another of
RWC’s right opportunistic lines is
“unite advanced workers and MarxistLeninists into a single Communist Par­
ty” (Movin’ On, Vol. 1, #2, June/July
1975). Generally from these lines, RWC
makes a series of right errors. They give
lip service to “Revolution as the main
trend” but in their September 1976
ALSC proposal, presented at the Con­
ference in Atlanta, and in their ^article
“Imperialism: A Dying System’, they
never apply that to our tasks, all the
tasks they proposed come from the
other factor of war, which they say
repeatedly is “the main issue today”.
This objectively means that they are say­
ing that “war is the main trend” which is
“RCP”s and WVO’s lines also. From
out of this we can now see and
understand their line and practices in
ALSC, for instance:
1. Sending out forged membership
guidelines for ALSC to people wanting
to join ALSC. The RWC inserted the
line “c)actively expose our own bour­
geoisie in the US”, which is theirs and
“RCP”s line. That is, their line doesn’t
expose Soviet Social Imperialism as the
main danger of war. They push “equilib­
rium”, which objectively unites with the
UCP”SU.
2. Stripping of ALSC’s principles of
unity so that “RCP” could unite with
them so they and the “Revolutionary
Student Brigade, (RSB) could join and

take over ALSC. (The specifics of this
will be gone over in the ALSC
conference in the debate between RCL
and WVO on the international
situation.)
3. The forcing of a comrade off the SC
after he had been elected at the
September conference in Atlanta, using
“policy” as the excuse to do it.
4. Continuous right opportunistic
style of work.
And so all the above general lines and
practices show that RWC is suffering
from right errors, and this is why they do
not come out and point to right oppor­
tunism as the main danger in the anti­
revisionist Communist movement in the
USA. But RWC is not alone in making
right errors, WVO also makes a number
of serious errors which if not corrected
will objectively place them right beside
RWC in the marsh of right op­
portunism.
For example, on the International
situation WVO held that there are “two
contending trends”, and babbles that
“to say Revolution is the main trend is
revisionism”. This line is completely undialectical and pushes equilibrium, of
which Chairman Mao said, “Nothing in
this world develops absolutely evenly;
we must oppose the theory of even
development or the theory of equili­
brium”, (“On Contradictions,” Sei.
Readings, pg. 117). WVO’s contention
that revolution and war are in equili­
brium makes almost impossible the
planning of such strategic and tactical
policies and analysis, such as where the
main blow must be aimed, the weakest
link of the imperialist chain, and etc. Ac­
tually WVO holds that superpower
contention is the principal contradic­
tion, “the principal contradiction in the
world is shifting from that between the
oppressed nations and imperialism to
that between the imperialist powers,”
(WVO Journal #4, pg. 34). This is clear
evidence that they hold “war is the main
trend” and also at the ALSC forum in
New York City, while struggling with
RCL they were forced to say they think
“war will happen because revolution is
not likely in the two superpowers”. This
is the old Progressive Labor Trot line
which belittles struggle and revolution
in the 3rd World. WVO did this verbally
at the September ALSC conference
when a vote was taken and their reac­
tionary line on “two contending trends”
was defeated. The WVO exhibited very
un-Marxist behavior and was asked to
repudiate their actions, and to this date
they have not done this yet. However,
this line struggle will be taken up in the
debate at the ALSC conference in
Washington, D.C. on May 27, 28.
Also the RCL would like to have selfcriticism around the role that we played
during the whole struggle against the
left-liquidationist line which was
represented by RWL at the time. We
realize that as Communists we could
have done much more propaganda,
organized more chapters and generally
could have mobilized and organized
more people to struggle against that
line. This was not done based on our
right opportunist errors which we still
see as the main danger and will continue
to struggle against it.

Bourgeois Nationalists Love
Affair With The Soviet Union
In 1977, African Liberation Day will
be confusing to the masses of people
because there will be three different
demonstrations all supposedly support­
ing African Liberation; we will attempt
to show how objectively two under­
mine it and are actually collaborators
with the enemies of the world’s peoples,
the superpowers. We have already
spoken to the second demonstration be­
ing organized by the right opportunists
“RCP” and RWC and now we have to
speak to the third demonstration being
put on by the All African Peoples
Revolutionary Party which is led by the
eclectic opportunist, Stokely Car­
michael. The danger of the AAPRP is
that they sow the greatest corruption
among the Black masses and workers by
teaching them that:

1. The USA is the main danger to the
people of the world. (Is it a coincidence
that this is the same line of “RCP” and
its lacky RWC?)
2. That the Soviet Union and Cuba
are socialist countries. (We wonder how
do they explain Angola and the role of
Cuba and the Soviet Union?)
3. The “Core of the Black Revolution
is in Africa.” This totally liquidates the
need to struggle for revolution here in
the United States which is out and out
collaboration with the enemy.
4. “The principal contradiction in the
US is racism.” They then place
capitalism in a secondary position and
say that if racism is eradicated then
capitalism will be destroyed which is a
totally metaphysical line because
capitalism is the material base upon
which racism was invented to serve and
not vice versa. What this does is to help
the bourgeoisie divide the working class
along national divisions, attempting to
make it impossible for them to unite and
destroy capitalism, and without this
unity, socialist revolution is not possible
here in the US. Once again this is pure
collaboration with the enemy.
All of the above general statements
point out the dangers of bourgeois
nationalism which attempts to smother
class struggle, disunite the interna­
tional proletariat, and collaborates with
U.S. imperialism and Soviet social
imperialism. This is done by such
bourgeois nationalist organizations as
AAPRP (all of the above points are
covered in their call to the ALD demon­
stration which is dated March 26, 1977),
and the Pan-African Youth Move­
ment, who recently sent a letter to many
organizations in the USA attacking the
role of the USA in Zaire while totally
leaving out the fact that it was the Soviet
Union who had the mercenaries trained
by their lacky puppet Cubans and sent
into Zaire in the first place. The letter
speaks of the great revolutionary Pat­
rice Lumumba but we failed to under­
stand how the bourgeois nationalists
justify the fact that it was the USSR who
voted along with the USA, Argentina,
Ceylon, Ecuador, Italy, Poland, and
Tunisia in 1960 in the United Nations
Security Council to send in the Belgian
troops to kill Lumumba. The AAPRP
and the PA YM are all shields for Soviet
social-imperialism and conciliators with
revisionism. What these organizations
fail to understand is that to oppose US
imperialism, it is also necessary to op­
pose Soviet social-imperialism. The
struggle against imperialism cannot be
separated from the struggle against revi­
sionism. In 1977, this is the test for all
who truly persist in the anti-imperialist
and anti-revisionist struggle and makes
a clear line of demarcation with those
who support and uphold the revisionists
in state power, the Soviet Union, the
main source of world war and the main
danger to the people of the world. It is
understandable that for various reasons
some people have, for the time being,
tailed to see this, but in the case of
AAPRP, who claim to be “scientific
socialists” (actually they are “nation­
alist philistines” who masquerade under
the guise of being “socialists”, who are in
reality reactionary bourgeois national­
ists), yet cannot analyze the interna­
tional situation and correctly point out
the main danger, we question how is this
possible.
Revisionism has always been a social
prop of imperialism, a force serving
imperialism. To combat imperialism, it
is imperative to carry out the struggle
against revisionism to the end. Also to­
day the revisionism of Soviet social­
imperialism and its lackies are engaged
in splitting activities against MarxistLeninists and the revolutionary peoples
of the world. For example, the Soviet
Union claims to be the “natural ally” of
the Arab people but yet they con­
tinually send manpower to Israel, the
Zionists in aggression and expansion
against the Arab countries. Also we
wonder what is the point of the USSR
now resuming trade relations with Is­
rael. While the USSR is courting Israel
(US lacky) the USA is courting Cuba
(USSR lacky) which can only mean that
the imperialists are once again

Page 9
maneuvering for spheres of influence to
the detriment of the people of the world.
All of these dangers of bourgeois
nationalism must be defeated and will
be defeated along with imperialism and
social-imperialism which is why all
those who seek to serve the proletariat
must unite the workers of all nations,
and unswervingly fight bourgeois
nationalism, domestic or foreign. The
place of those who advocate bourgeois
nationalism (usually the petit
bourgeois) is beside the bourgeoisie so
they can be smashed along with the
bourgeoisie, because proletarian internationism and bourgeois nationalism
are two irreconcilable lines that object­
ively represent two opposing world out­
looks, that of the international pro­
letariat and that of the bourgeoisi e ,
imperialism and social-imperialism.
African Liberation Day and
Party Building in the USA
The struggles in Africa, particularly
in Zaire, Azania, Namibia and Zim­
babwe, is a life or death struggle against
colonialism (old and new), imperial­
ism, racial discrimination and apar­
theid. They are a component part of the
proletarian revolution that is dealing
decisive and crushing blows to the
imperialists and social-imperialists and
their lackies. All Marxist-Leninists, ad­
vanced forces and the progressive
peoples of the world must unreservedly
support these struggles. The best way
for Marxist-Leninists and the advanced
to support African Liberation is to par­
ticipate in “Uniting Marxist-Leninists,
and winning the advanced to Commun­
ism” to build a REVOLUTIONARY
MARXIST-LENINIST COMMUN­
IST PARTY based on MARXISMLENIN ISM-MAO
TSETUNG
THOUGHT, the science of revolution.
The building of this party of “the new
type” is the only assurance that revision­
ists, such as the “CP”USA, right oppor­
tunists, such as “RCP” and the RWC,
and bourgeois nationalists, such as
AAPRP, APP and PAYM, will be
thoroughly exposed and defeated here
in the USA. The central task of Marx­
ist-Leninists and all advanced forces in
the USA today is to undertake the build­
ing of this party, this party of the wor­
king class, this party that will organize
and unite the struggles of the working
class and oppressed peoples into a
mighty fist to smash imperialism
through armed struggle, seize state
power and institute the dictatorship of
the proletariat.
We must have a party that will be bold
enough to lead the proletariat and the
masses of people in this struggle for
power and no matter what the twists and
turns, this party must base itself on the
correct ideological and political line
because the correctness or incorrectnesj^pf the ideological and political line
decides everything. Without such a
party guided by Marxism-LeninismMao Tsetung Thought, it is impossible
to even think of winning a socialist
revolution and establishing a dictator­
ship of the proletariat here in the USA.
Our efforts to build this party, a multi­
national communist party is part of the
irresistable trend of revolution which is
the main trend in the world today, and
as for the other trend, the tide of
imperialist war, we must prepare for it
or we will suffer. But ultimately, war or
not, it is the imperialists, social­
imperialists and their lackies all over the
world who will suffer, and be completely
destroyed by the peoples of the world.

WORKERS AND OPPRESSED
NATIONS AND PEOPLES, UNITE!
MARXISTS-LEN1NISTS UNITE WIN THE ADVANCED TO COM­
MUNISM!
BUILD A REVOLUTIONARY
MARXIST-LENINIST COMMUN­
IST PARTY IN THE USA BASED ON
MARXISM-LENINISM-MAO
TSETUNG THOUGHT TO SMASH
CAPITALISM
AND
BUILD
SOCIALISM AND THE DIC­
TATORSHIP OF THE PROLETAR­
IAT.

Unity & Struggle

Page 10

Dialectical and Historical Materialism:
From History of the Communist Party Soviet Union
(Bolshevik) 1939
Part 9
Further, there can be no doubt that
the concept “conditions of material life
of society” also includes growth of
population, density of population of
one degree or another, for people are an
essential element of the conditions of
material life of society, and without a
definite minimum number of people
there can be no material life of society. Is
not growth of population the chief force
that determines the character of the
social system of man?
Historical materialism answers this
question too in the negative.
Of course, growth of population does
influence the development of society,
does facilitate or retard the development
of society, but it cannot be the chief
force of development of society, and its
influence on the development of society
cannot be the determining influence
because, by itself, growth of population
does not furnish the clue to the question
why a given social system is replaced
precisely by such and such a new system
and not by another, why the primitive
communal system is succeeded precisely
by the slave system by the feudal system,
and the feudal system by the bourgeois
system, and not by some other.
If growth of population were the
determining force of social
development, then a higher density of
population would be bound to give rise
to a correspondingly higher type of
social system. But we do not find this to
be the case. The density of population in
China is four times as great as in the
U.S.A., yet the U.S.A, stands higher
than China in the scale of social
development, for in China a semi-feudal
system still prevails, whereas the U.S.A,
has long ago reached the highest stage of
development of capitalism. The density
of population in Belgium is nineteen
times as great as in the U.S.A., and
twenty-six times as great as in the
U.S.S.R. Yet the U.S.A, stands higher
than Belgium in the scale of social
development; and as for the U.S.S.R.,
Belgium lags a whole historical epoch
behind this country, for in Belgium the
capitalist system prevails, whereas the
U.S.S.R. has already done away with
capitalism and has set up a Socialist
system.
It follows from this that growth of
population is not, and cannot be, the
chief force of development of society,
the force which determines the character
of the social system, the development of
society from one system to another?
This force, historical materialism
holds, is the method of procuring the
means of life necessary for human ex­
istence, the mode of production of
material values — food, clothing*
footwear, houses, fuel, instruments of
production, etc. — which are in­
dispensable for the life of development
of society.
In order to live, people must have
food, clothing, footwear, shelter, fuel,
etc.; in order to have these material
values, people must produce them; and
in order to produce them, people must
have the instruments of production with
which food, clothing, footwear, shelter,
fuel, etc., are produced; they must be
able to produce these instruments and to
use them.
The instruments of production
wherewith material values are
produced, the people who operate the
instruments of production and carry on
the production of material values
thanks to a certain production ex­
perience and labour skill — all these
elements jointly constitute the produc­
tive forces of society.
But the productive forces are only one
aspect of production, only one aspect of
the mode of production, an aspect that
expresses the relation of men to the ob­
jects and forces of nature which they
make use of for the production of
material values. Another aspect of
production, another aspect of the mode
of production, is the relation of men to
each other in the process of production,
men’s relations of production. Men

carry on a struggle against nature and
utilize nature for the production of
material values not in isolation from
each other, not as separate individuals,
but in common, in groups, in societies.
Production, therefore, is at all times and
under all conditions social production.
In the production of material values
men enter into mutual relations of one
kind or another within production, into
relations of production of one kind or
another. These may be relations of co­
operation and mutual help between
people who are free from exploitation;
they may be transitional from one form
of relations of production to another.
But whatever the character of the
relations of production may be. always
and in every system, they constitute just
as essential an element of production as
the productive forces of society.

Chairman Mao said, “Comrade Stalin,
in comprehensive and classical manner,
developed Marxist-Leninist theory, he
opened up a new stage in the develop­
ment of Marxism. . .Comrade Stalin
also creatively developed the Leninist
theory of the building of the Party.”
“In production,” Marx says, “men
not only act on nature but also on one
another. They produce only by co­
operating in a certain way and mutually
exchanging their activities. In order to
produce, they enter into definite connec­
tions and relations with one another and
only within these social connections and
relations does their action on nature,
does production, take place.” (Karl
Marx, Selected Works, Vol. I. p. 264).
Consequently, production, the mode
of production, embraces both the
productive forces of society and men’s
relations of production, and is thus the
embodiment of their unity in the process
of production of material values.

To be continued

SLOGANS FOR AFRICAN
LIBERATION DAY PUT FORTH BY
THE AFRICAN LIBERATION SUP­
PORT COMMITTEE:
THESOUTHERN AFRICAN PEO­
PLE WILL SURELY WIN VICTORY
THRU SELF-RELIANCE AND
ARMED STRUGGLE!

KICK THE TWO SUPERPOWERS,
US IMPERIALISM AND USSR
SOCIAL-IMPERIALISM, OUT OF
AFRICA!
DOWN WITH THE FASCIST
WHITE MINORITY REGIMES. RE­
JECT ALL SHAM INDEPEN­
DENCE SCHEMES!
US PEOPLE, OPPOSE THE SUPER­
POWER WAR PREPARATION,
DEFEAT US IMPERIALISM!

WORKERS
AND OPPRESSED
NATIONS AND PEOPLES OF THE
WORLD, UNITE!

Editorial
(Continued from page 12)
turnaround in that there always exists
both right and left deviations in any
Marxist-Leninist line, and our task at
the moment is to break with the left op­
portunist trend." But this is plain out &
out sophistry for M LOC to say that this
isn’t a major turnaround in their line, for
they even admit elsewhere in their
correspondence with RCL, that these
repudiations are, “major developments
in our line on party building and other
questions." And in actuality this “major
development" is also a great step into
the swamp.
But on the question MLOC’s
repudiating the fact that fusion is a ques­
tion of fusing the communist and
workers movement, we would raise first
that as Lenin stressed, “In every country
there has been a period in which the
working-class movement existed apart
from socialism, each going its own way;
and in every country this isolation has
weakened both socialism and the wor­
king class movement. Only the fusion of
socialism with the working class
movement has in all countries created a
durable basis for both.... It is a very dif­
ficult process and there is therefore
nothing suprising in the fact that it is ac­
companied by vacillations and doubts.”
(Lenin, Party Work in the Masses, p. 7)
And again Lenin says in A Retrograde
Trend in Russian Social Democracy,
.When this fusion takes place the class
struggle of the workers becomes the
conscious struggle of the proletariat to
emancipate itself from exploitation by
the propertied classes, it is evolved into a
higher form of the socialist workers
movement- the independent working­
class Social-Democratic party.”
MLOC’s backward line on fusion li­
quidates the anti-revisionist communist
movement and says there is only a spon­
taneous workers movement, and like
true reformists want only to worship
that spontaneity.
In talking about Party Program,
MLOC somehow separates it from the
question of political line. But without
ideological struggle over political line,
no program can be reached. Political
line being M-L-M concretely applied to
the concrete issues that must be solved
to make proletarian revolution in the
U.S. They have no understanding of
what key link means, that link in the
political chain of our present tasks that
will enable us to have a grasp of the en­
tire chain and move to complete the
present task and move on to the next. At
one point they say Party Building is the
Key Link, (“to revolution”) but this does
not tell us how we complete our central
task now which is party building. Later
they say fusion is the key link, but hav­
ing liquidated the communist
movement where is the fusion to come
from, where is scientific socialism to
come from—why it spontaneously pops
into the working class movement, imply
the arch economists MLOC. Fusion is
the fundamental contradiction in the life
of the party, the combining of scientific
socialism with the workers movement.
But the key link at the present stage of
the party building process is Political
Line, and the ideological struggle over
political line by which we unite as Marxist-Leninists and win the advanced to
communism.
MLOC mutates lines so fast that they
shrink away from the idea of ideological
struggle over political line being the key
link to party building, and the method
by which a program will be put together
which will enable genuine MarxistLeninists to call a party congress
together.
Organizations like I WK are also not
clear enough that they uphold Political
Line is Key link in the party building
process today, and ideological struggle
over political line, the method by which
we unite Marxist Leninists and win the
advanced to communism, creating a
party program—maximum and
minimum goals, & strategy and tactics
for achieving them. 1WK tends to talk
about mass struggle without lending a
consistently revolutionary analysis of
the situations of mass struggle that they
cite. They tend to leave these decisions
in the realm of reformism and not point
out that reform is not an end in itself.

but must be a means of party building
& struggling for socialist revolution.
WVO line of “equilibrium"re: the
international situation, ie, “two conten­
ding trends," which belittles materialist
dialectics, they are being backed off of.
and changing their Viewpoint line to
“war is the main trend" (ref, “N Y ALSC”
forum, and P.S-4, “Either war will give
rise to revolution or revolution will
prevent the war. These are the two pos­
sible paths to revolution. The more
likely situation is that world war will
give rise to revolution, though we can­
not predict the exact course history will
take.”)
Although the factors for both war and
revolution are rising, this does not
uphold equilibrium, events in Southern
Africa, Middle East and in Asia, Latin
America or So •
Ireland show that
revolution is still the main trend in the
world today. This does not mean that at
one time war cannot become the main
trend. The line that “revolution is the
main trend because this is the era of
imperialism and proletarian revolution”
is an idealist line that does not differen­
tiate between the general and the par­
ticular, between the universal and the
specific. The “Wing” took this line with
the bankrupt “Revolution is the only
trend,” and MLOC takes (took? they
might have mutated it already) this line,
absurdly putting forward that
“Revolution is always the main trend
even during world war” and charging
that the Comintern and Stalin were in­
correct for formulating the United
Front tactic with the liberal bourgeoisie
against fascism. It shows how much
idealism links the “left” trot-like
deviations with the right opportunist
deviations. Begin by saying revolution is
always the main trend so that even dur­
ing fascist upsurge all the bourgeosie is
seen as exactly the same, without con­
tradictions, which leads to a trot line.
But WVO does not seem to
understand imperialism thoroughly,
and also are buffaloed by their con­
tinuing denigration and downplaying,
outright belittling of the national
liberation movements (perhaps related
to the same national chauvinism that
made them say that the national
movements were the source of the
Dangerous Duo’s Hustlerism, rather
than their petty bourgeois class outlook.
This is also reminiscent of the, old
Progressive Labor “Party’s” national
chauvinism and neotrotskyism)
WVO does not understand revolution
as spearheaded by the people and
nations of the third world will help bring
revolution in the U.S. and eventually
USSR too. In the NY ALSC forum,
WVO put forward that in order for
revolution to stop war it would have to
be raging inside the US and USSR too.
But they shd remember how Mozam­
bique and Angola’s being ripped out
from under Portugal, toppled that fas­
cist state! Intensified the internal con­
tradictions inside Portugal to such an
extent as to actually set off revolution in
Portugal.
This is because the essence of
imperialism is the oppression of nations,
the division of the world into oppressor
nations and oppressed nations, and it is
this oppression that raises to such inten­
sity the contradiction between
imperialism and the third world and has
made of the national movements spear­
heads of the proletarian movement
world wide. Imperialism is an inter­
nationalsystem, the capitalists have
left the boundaries of one country, and
in their search for new markets, new
sources of raw materials, new places to
export capital, new spheres of influence
the very stability of the imperialist
powers themselves is based on their con­
tinual expansion. Revolution in the
third world causes the violent con­
traction of imperialism’s markets,
sources of raw materials, places to ex­
port capital, spheres of influence. . .it
undermines the very basis of
imperialism’s strength, its constant ex­
pansion. It intensifies all the internal
contradictions inside the imperialist for­
tresses and speeds revolution there.
Opportunism’s material base is the
......................... (Continued on page 11)

Unity & Struggle

ASSATA SHAKUR
(Continued from page 3)
struggling against national oppression
& racism, and a revolutionary black
woman struggling against the ruthless
oppression of women in capitalist
society. The multi-national proletariat
& all revolutionary people in the U.S.
must come out and support Assata
Shakur in her struggle against the
organized terrorism & repression at the
hands of the Bourgeois State Apparatus
and tirelessly defend her democratic
rights.
We do not agree with the political line
of the Black Liberation Army,
specifically we believe that there are
more than enough outrages committed
by the bourgeoisie under U.S.
capitalism each & everyday to rouse the
advanced elements of the working class
movement and those who are not roused
by the general oppressive conditions
under capitalism, these acts of terror by
the bourgeoisie, will not be roused by
“watching a handful of terrorists
engaged in single combat with the
government.” (See Lenin’s discussion of

economism & terrorism in What Is To
Be Done, p.95) In fact the masses are
aroused by the general conditions under
capitalism and these outrages & ter­
rorist acts of the bourgeoisie against the
masses, but the question is, how do we
organize & educate the proletariat in its
own class interest to end this evil system
of capitalism & national oppression
forever? Thru propaganda, agitation
and organization, the working class and
its allies must be organized by its
vanguard, its Revolutionary MarxistLeninist Communist Party, to smash
capitalism, build socialism and establish
and consolidate the dictatorship of the
proletariat in order to suppress the real
beast, the real “animal”, the handful of
moneybags—the capitalist class. But at
the same time, we will support the resis­
tance of the people against oppression
wherever it occurs and we do our com­
munist duty to expose the beastly nature
of the capitalist system so that the great
masses of people will rise up under the
leadership of its vanguard communist
party and smash it.

Under the dictatorship of the proletariat in China, national oppression was des­
troyed, and it will take Socialist Revolution in the U.S.A, to end this evil system
of national oppression and racism!

FAN THE FLAMES!

Subscribe Now!
Revolutionary
Red Banner
Theoretical journal of the ATM(Ml)
Cause
Political Organ of the
ATM (ML)
Coven events tn the U S and inter
nationally >n the tommuniit move
ment the worken movement and
the national movements
J 5 (X) a year

(

Contents of 1st issue
•
Ot. Right Opportunist Feint to the left
•
Degeneration of the PRRWO (by e»
PRRWOj
•
< FrgaruratKXsal Prim iples of the ( twnmu
mst international rrftrint
•
CPUSA Opportunism on the (.huano
National (Question
•
More Agitation More Propaganda
Communist International reprint
f ovl il 5<> issuef. JSC f.isrjge/
J4 SO year f. 7SC ;*isugel

Subscription - Revoiutxxrary Cause CJ Subscription

Red Banner O Single Red Banner D

Name __________________________________

Address ________________________________
State __ ___________________ Zip

ATM (ML)
P.O.Box 32026
Los Angeles, Calif.
90032

SUPPORT TriE
African Liberation Support Committee’s
Conference
To be held May 27, and 28 in Washington, D.C.
Demonstration
The AFRICAN LIBERATION DAY MARCH
will gather in:
Ellipse Park at 14th St. NW on May 28th at 12 noon.
Ellipse Park is right behind the White House

SUPPORT
AFRICAN LIBERATION DAY
Further Information:
ALSC National Office
P.O. Box 3161
Washington, D.C. 20010

Page 11

Editorial
(Continued from page 10)
superprofits scooped out of the third
world by imperialism. Opportunism
does effect the whole multinational wor­
king class, from its most blatant man­
ifestation, viz, the bribery of the labor
aristocrats, a small sector of the
workers, and the petty bourgeoisie. But
it also creates a bigger carrot to use in it’s
carrot and stick control of the masses, it
enables there to be put out more wide­
spread illusions of reform and peaceful
change. It also means that, in the USA,
the sector that is bribed is larger, and
this bribed sector is put in more wides­
pread “leadership” of the masses
through trade unions, through electoral
politics and antipoverty type programs,
through the media, frequently thru art,
culture, athletics, community and civil
rights organizations, even thru sham
“Marxist” organizations.
The revolutionary surge of the third
world helps destroy the material base
for the widespread opportunism in the
USA, & exacerbate the internal con­
tradictions of this dying imperialist
system.
Who can deny the revolution raging
forward in Southern Africa, only a
bourgeois official, an ignorant person or
a chauvinist. (Trots of course combine
all three.) it is the fire, the pressure
steady increasing and intensifying
throughout the 3rd world that forces
imperialism into defensive postures and
at the same time force it to put even
more weight on “Its own workers,” eg,
the budget cuts and layoffs here in the
US. Liberation of Southern Africa will
further isolate the US and throw all
imperialism into a terminal frenzy. It will
also throw the USSR into antagonistic
contradiction with independent Africa,
to the exact extent that these govts move
toward socialism. Because the USSR
will have its expansionism opposed and
its mask of “natural ally” of the
revolutionary movements torn off.
W VO does not believe that revolution
is going on in the 3rd world. Like Trots
they think only revolution in US
&USSR (“the advanced capitalist coun­
tries”) constitutes real revolution.
WVO has recently become a member
of the ALSC (See article in this issue)
and so their erroneous line on the inter­
national question must be struggled
against, but at the present time the main
danger in ALSC is the consolidating
rightward motion of the RWC
(Revolutionary Workers’ Congress)
which has now become a cats paw and
interlocutor for the sham communist of
the so called “Revolutionary Comm­
unist Party”. “RCP” is a consolidated
right opportunist mish-mosh; witness
their trashy May Day non-propaganda.
Not once did it mention socialism,
party building,revolution or the dic­
tatorship of the proletariat. Instead it
called for reforms & the forming of a
national mass workers organization.
RWC & RCP holding up only “US
Imperialism as the enemy of the world’s
people is objectively liquidating the
blow that must be struck at Soviet
Social Imperialism, and by so doing
unite openly with the CPSU, and the
CPUSA (R).
The national question is a part of the
general question of the proletarian
revolution, a part of the question of the
dictatorship of the proletariat.” (J.
Stalin, Foundations of Leninism, pg.
73) LPR presently holds the line that the
Puerto Rican revolution will have to be
a two stage revolution, based upon the
facts that it is a colony of United States
imperialism, which controls it
economically, politically and militarily,
i.e. 14% of Puerto Rico is occupied by
US military bases. The US is the prin­
cipal contradiction vs the oppressed
Puerto Rican nation.
LPR also raises the attempts by
Soviet Social imperialism to dominate
the Puerto Rican national liberation
movement, specifically thru their con­
trol of PSP (Puerto Rican Socialist Par­
ty) and Cuba. RCL unites with this. The
Puerto Rican people, led by the
proletariat and its vanguard must in the

first stage wage a struggle (democratic
revolution) against foreign imperialism
and from there, in the second stage
defeat their own bourgeoisie and their
lackies in order to build socialism and
the dictatorship of the proletariat and
the eventual emergence of communism.
We think it is a good thing that LPR
criticized their past line where they
characterize the Puerto Rican
revolution as only having one stage, (see
Resistance Vol.7 #9 where they lay out
their self-criticism) Many times organ­
izations merely change their line
without admitting to past errors. To
paraphrase Lenin, self-criticism and
criticism show if we are genuine com­
munists or not and how we conduct that
criticism. We also unite with LPR in ex­
posing and opposing the US imperalist
trick of statehood of Puerto Rico and
the current international situation, “The
principal contrdiction in the world to­
day is between the two superpowers U.S. imperialism and Soviet Social
imperialism on the one hand and the
nations and oppressed peoples of the
third world on the other. The people of
the third world and their struggles for
liberation is the principal force shaping
the world today. Revolution is the main
trend in the world today..........In their
struggle to dominate the world, each of
the superpowers try to maintain a tight
grip on areas under their control while
at the same time gaining influence in
areas under control of the other super­
power. In Puerto Rico for an example,
the principal contradiction against who
all forces that can be united must be
united is Yankee imperialism.” (Resis­
tance, Vol. 8#1) Party Building, the
Central Task
In Resistance vol. 8#1&2, LPR began
polemicizing with ATM. We are also
doing an analysis of ATM’s line which
will be forthcoming. But we see the need
to raise questions to LPR about these
polemics. In a forum in Newark several
months ago, LPR repudiated the
position they previously had had held in
common with the ATM on 2 line
struggle being the exception to the rule
inside communist organizations. Since
LPR repudiated this erroneous line, we
question why we have not seen this
repudiated publicly or seen it in the
criticism of ATM.

This line cannot be disconnected with
the other errors LPR accuses ATM of.
MLM can only develop in struggle and
this struggle must be continuous, out­
side and inside the organization. “At all
times the class struggle in society the
struggle between the capitalist class and
the working class, is reflected within the
Communist Party and indeed within the
minds of individual communists. The
class struggle is a fact. It exists irrespec­
tive of man’s will ... the Communist
Party as a part of that objective reality
cannot stand aside from the class
struggle. Internationally it does and
must reflect the class struggle. (The Aus­
tralian Communist, #78, pg. 22-23)
Right Opportunism, the Main Danger
We have already criticized LPR for
the formulation, “Revisionism is the
main danger in the communist
movement and reformism is the main
danger in the workers movement.” LPR
still has not offered sufficient basis for
their position and in studying this fur­
ther we found further justification for
RCL’s line that revisionism is the main
danger in the communist and workers
movements. “The main danger and
enemy for our party and the entire inter­
national revolutionary communist and
workers’ movement has been and still is
right opportunism, revisionism.” (Sum­
mary of the Report on the Activity of
the Central Committee of the PLA, pg.
8) And in their continuing struggle
against modern revisionism the Aus­
tralian Communists state, “The struggle
against revisionism required hard, con­
tinuing work amongst the people. The
integration of Marxism—LeninismMao Tsetung Thought with
revolutionary practice could only be
done in ceaseless struggle against
revisionism. (The Australian Com­
munist #78, pg. 62)
(Continued on page 4)

Unity & Struggle

Page 12

EDITORIAL
RCL’s original party building paper
tried to lay out unities and differences
with several communist organizations.
We feel this is constantly necessary in
order to promote the unity of MarxistLeninists which is the leading aspect of
our two simultaneous tactical tasks of
party building, one half of the slogan
that describes these tasks, MARX1STLENINISTS UNITE, which is the
aspect that sets the other aspect in
motion, as the catalyst that enables us to
WIN THE ADVANCED TO COM­
MUNISM.
The October League recently put
themselves forward as the “Communist
Party (M-L)”. This further confirms
that they are the main danger pushing
right opportunism in the anti-revisionist
communist movement. In the current is­
sue of the Call, O.L.’s so called party
program contains page after page of
phrase mongering and O.L.’s bourgeois
lines on various questions. They con­
tinually speak of themselves as the
“party of the proletariat”, but should
add to that they are self appointed. The
“CP(M-L)” is a right opportunist “par­
ty” of the menshevik Martov type, a
bourgeois labor party that will act as an
agent of the bourgeoisie inside the wor­
king class movement not a
Revolutionary Marxist-Leninist Com­
munist Party based on MarxismLeninism-Mao TseTung Thought.
O.L.’s “party program” is not a
program at all, but more “current
events”, economism and
phrase
mongering. They completely negate the
ideological struggle over political line
which is the key link in this stage of the
pre-party period. Without ideological
struggle over political lines, there can be
no clear lines of demarcation between
the genuine and the sham and no real
unity achieved. But O.L. is not
interested in waging that ideological
struggle, or any other struggle for that

matter. Their method of attaining this
unity is by being “personable and frien­
dly,” using their traveling salesman ap­
proach to party building, based on “all
unity” of a completely unprincipled
kind, trying to suck in young MarxistLeninist groups under their hegemony.
In the stampede to call the first “party
congress”, O.L. has united all of its op­
portunist forces around their “party
building is a question of immediacy”
line and to further justify this op­
portunism, say that the danger of a new
world war has made the formation of
their party an even more urgent task.
OL’s erroneous assertation that “the
CP(M-L)” was forged in the heat of
class struggle is an out and out lie. As a
matter of fact, rather than struggle
around the slogans for IWWD 1975,OL
said the slogan “Oppose Superpower
War Preparation” could stay (after they
tried to opportunistically drop the
slogan) because it didn’t make any
difference to them, as long as “we did
not lose friends.”
In terms of the world situation, OL
says that war and fascism are the main
trend in the world today. OL does not
see the role of the 3rd world struggles
against imperialism as being important.
This is more of OL’s chauvinism,
because the liberation struggles in the
3rd world are the motor of revolution
and the main trend in the world today.
And on the Afro-American National
Question, more chauvinism. OL says
throughout their “party program” that
they support the right of self deter­
mination for oppressed nations, but
never once do they mention the fact that
They oppose secession, which is more of
their foul opportunism. OL knows that
without the right to secede, the call for
self-determination is a sham. This is the
classic 2nd International chauvinist line
of not supporting self-determination of
oppressed nations.
OL has liquidated the anti-revisionist
communist movement from which they
themselves came, saying that all other
political parties and trends are the
defenders of capitalism and that all

MAY DAY

(Continued from page 1)
Day. This day was choosen because it
was on May 1, 1886 that workers
throughout the U.S. rallied and held a
general strike in the struggle for an 8
hour day. This was an immediate and
important struggle for the workers who
at that time were forced to work for 1016 hours a day.
The strike held in Chicago grew
steadily until by May 3rd over 30,000
workers were included with thousands
more showing sympathy and in demon­
strations, particularly in a demon­
stration against the use of scabs at the
McCormick Harvester Works. The
police, protecting the property of the
capitalists they serve, fired into the
crowd of peaceful workers, killing 4 and
wounding many others.
Even though the strike had started on
May 1st, it continued many days
afterwards. On May 4th demon­
strations were held again in favor of the
8 hour day, against police repression
and in support of other basic democratic
rights. About 180 police marched into
the peaceful crowd of demonstrators, a
bomb went off in the ranks of the police
killing 1 policeman and wounding
another, this is believed to be the work
of an agent provocateur. The capitalist
state went on the rampage, smashing
presses, raiding workers’ homes, raiding
labor offices, arresting and torturing
workers, and particularly the leaders. 7
labor leaders were sentenced in connec­
tion with the bombing and 4 of them
were hanged. This was one of many
brutal frame-ups in our history!
The struggles of the workers in
Chicago taught the working class some
bloody
lessons.
Marxist-Leninists
theory is the summed up experience of
the working class & oppressed nations
and peoples* struggles taken in its
general aspect; the Chicago workers
struggles taught the international wor­
king class some bloody lessons, which
summed up, deepened and confirmed

the correctness of Marxism-Leninism.
It taught us that the police, courts,
prisons, army, etc. are part of the state
machinery, and that “the state is an
organ of class rule, an organ for the oppression of one class by
another.’’(Lenin,
STATE AND
REVOLUTION) And that no matter
how “peaceful” and disciplined the
workers are, the capitalists will unleash
the most vile terror of the state to repress
the struggle of the working class and op­
pressed peoples. Thus confirming
another basic law of Marxism-Leninism
that socialist revolution and the dicta­
torship of the proletariat can only come
about through the smashing of the cap­
italist state by armed force and seizing
state power.
It taught that the working class must
be united in its fight against capital, and
that the bourgeois ruling class is afraid
of the organized power of the working
class and will use everything it can to
create disunity among the ranks of the
workers. From using scabs and strike­
breakers, to fomenting national chau­
vinism and hatred.
It taught that nothing would be
gained without a most determined fight,
and that for this fight the workers must
master all forms of struggle and organ­
ization both illegal and legal.
Workers the world over summed up
these struggles and learned from these
lessons and International Workers Day,
May Day was born
Now, in 1977, U.S. capitalism is en­
trapped in the further degeneration of
its moribund economic system which is
nearing a state of permanent crisis.
There is no relief or emancipation of the
working class from this death grip of
capital other than Socialist Revolution.
Workers, who must sell their collective
labor power for their own subsistence to
a small group of profit hungry vampires
who expropriate all wealth, are finding
out daily that the layoffs, speed-ups, lit(Continued on page 5)

those who oppose the system of
capitalism should rally around the “CP
(M-L)” and take up its program whole­
heartedly. This is totally reactionary
and another example of OL’s
hegemony. But genuine MarxistLeninist and Advanced forces will not
unite with this bankrupt, right op­
portunist “party”.
OL says nothing about the
development of factory nuclei, the basic
unit of communist organization in their
party program. They pay lip service to
the fact that the communist party is an
illegal organization, but in reality prac­
tice legalism. OL raises trade unionism
and economism as the answer to the
problems of the working class in the
U.S. They summarize each section of
their so called program with a long list
of reforms, and puts them forth as if
these are the final aims of the struggle of
the multi-national working class and
oppressed nationalities.

V.I. Lenin, founder of the Russian
Communist Party (B), and leader of the
October Revolution in 1917, taught us
to always struggle against opportunist
lines in the building of the Party.

solidated right opportunist organ­
ization. The fact that OL claims to be
anti-Revisionist makes them even more
dangerous. OL has begun to cut the
essence from M-L-M with their concialitory revisionist lines such as party of
all classes (anyone who hollers fight­
back can be in the party) and be calling
lor a loose martov type party, denying
the party’s role as vanguard of the
proletariat.

OL’s petty bourgeois hobbyism which
they insist on calling “1 he Party”; The
Dangerous Duo’s (PRRWO & RWL’s)
“On To The First Party Congress” the
CLP’s revisionist non-party <fc RCP’s
chauvinist clique should make honest
Marxist-Leninists struggle even harder
to form a genuine Revolutionary Marx­
ist-Leninist Communist Party based on
Marxism-Leninism-Mao TseTung
Thought. All these sham party for­
mation rituals are just the petty
bourgeois calling attention to
themselves, as they zoom on out of the
communist movement. WVO’s “The
Party Is A Settled Question!” and
“WVO is the foundation of the genuine
Communist Party” certainly seems to be
a motion towards these same kind of
false alarms. And a clear indication of
WVO’s raging hegemonism (“The
overall most correct line”).

Additions to RCL’s Analysis of MLOC
MLOC has repudiated, as being left
opportunist, the lines which they
formerly held of; (1) The 2 tasks of win­
ning the advanced and uniting MarxistLeninists (2) Propaganda as the chief
form of activity (3) There is a low level of
fusion (4) Political line is key
link/Political line is key and theory is
decisive (5) Political line is really the
same as party program, or political line
is what you say on a certain ques­
tion. MLOC says that these repudiations
necessarily flow from their having
repudiated, “the essence of the line of
the wing,”i.e. that fusion is a question of
fusing the communist and workers
movement.
MLOC then has the nerve to say, “We
do not see this repudiation as a major
(Continued on page 10)
Amiri Baraka
NEW POETRY

HARD FACTS
Poetry 1973-75

The sham declaration that OL is now
the party shows that they are now a con­

Send $1.25
Plus Postage

c/° Hard Facts
Box 663
Newark, NJ. 07101

UNITY & STRUGGLE NEEDS SUSTAINERS AND CONTRIBUTORS!
Unity & Struggle newspaper has not been published since the October 1976
edition. Due to a series of internal and external factors, our paper has suffered
and continues to suffer from a severe financial crisis. The primary internal factor
has been right errors inside our organization, which belittles the decisive role of
propaganda, but this paper coming out is a reflection of our struggle against this
right opportunism. It is a struggle that must continue! At the same time, we are
publishing this paper under some difficult external conditions, and the under­
minding effects of this system of monopoly capitalism on its deathbed, take their
toll on the production & distribution costs of the newspaper.
We need your help! Unity & Struggle has taken on many responsibilities which
we see as necessary, but which are very costly. For example, U nity & Struggle has
the policy of free subscriptions to prisoners, who cannot afford subscriptions, as
part of a correspondence program we’ve operated to serve the prison population
& their families for years. This is very expensive, and we need your help to sustain
this kind of activity. We have also made some important changes that will get
subscriptions to the people faster.
A Unity & Struggle sustainer is a person who supports Unity & Struggle by
donating $5 each month to sustain the newspaper and to help the paper expand
its features. We are planning a section of our paper in Spanish, and we need funds
to help make this expansion. Sustainers will get a copy of all our publications
free, will be put on our mailing lists, will get periodic newsletters about our
organization’s line & activities, and will be notified about all of our programs.
Comrades and friends who cannot afford to be sustainers can help sustain this ef­
fort by making any donation they can afford, as often as they can afford! In fact,
we have received donations and this had helped us get back on our feet. But we
need much much more to publish this newspaper regularly. Contributions will
get copies of propaganda pieces we distribute free, will be put on our mailing lists,
will get periodic newsletters about our organization’s line & activities, and will be
notified about all our programs. Everyone can help by supporting the different
fundraising programs we will sponsor to support the newspaper: attend
programs, sell a bundle of newspapers in your organization or study group, dis­
tribute raffles in support of the paper, etc.
There are many features that will unfold in Unity & Struggle in the near future.
Support Unity & Struggle, watch for its development, and let us hear
from you as soon as possible. Donations should be sent to: P.O. Box 1181,
Newark, N.J. 07101, made payable to Unity & Struggle. Thank you for your support!

